2024 Pixar film Inside Out 2 is a 2024 American animated coming-of-age film produced by Pixar Animation Studios for Walt Disney Pictures . The sequel to Inside Out (2015), it was directed by Kelsey Mann (in his feature directorial debut) and produced by Mark Nielsen, from a screenplay written by Meg LeFauve and Dave Holstein, and a story conceived by Mann and LeFauve. Amy Poehler , Phyllis Smith , Lewis Black , Diane Lane , and Kyle MacLachlan reprise their roles from the first film, with Maya Hawke , Kensington Tallman, Tony Hale , Liza Lapira , Ayo Edebiri , Lilimar , Grace Lu, Sumayyah Nuriddin-Green, Adèle Exarchopoulos , and Paul Walter Hauser joining the cast. The film tells the story of Rile's emotions as they find themselves joined by new emotions that want to take over Rile's head. First announced in September 2022 during the D23 Expo , Inside Out 2 features Pixar chief creative officer Pete Docter's "five to 27 emotions" idea from the first film that Mann pitched during its production to utilize "truthful" worldbuilding . Like its predecessor, the production team consulted psychologists to accurately portray how teenager' emotions change during puberty, while also enlisting a group of teenagers to accurately portray modern teenage life. Inside Out 2 premiered at the El Capitan Theatre in Los Angeles on June 10, 2024, and was released in theaters in the United States on June 14. The film received positive reviews from critics and has grossed $1.234 billion worldwide, making it the highest-grossing film of 2024 . It had the third-biggest domestic opening weekend for an animated film, and became the fastest animated film to cross the $1 billion mark, alongside being the sixth-highest-grossing animated film of all time. Plot Two years after moving to San Francisco, 13-year-old Riley is about to enter high school. Her personified emotions — Joy, Sadness, Fear, Anger, and Disgust — now oversee a newly-formed element of Rile's mind called her "Sense of Self", which houses memories and feelings that shape her beliefs. Joy, aiming to fill the Sense of Self with only positive memories, creates a mechanism that launches negative memories to the back of Rile's mind. Riley and her best friends, Bree and Grace, are invited to a weekend ice hockey camp where Riley hopes to qualify for her schoo's team, the Firehawks. The night before camp, a "Puberty Alarm" goes off, and a group of mind workers clumsily upgrade the emotion console, leaving Headquarters in disarray. The emotions find that Riley overreacts to any inputs they make. Four new emotions — Anxiety, Envy, Embarrassment, and Ennui — arrive and clash with the original emotions over their approaches. Joy wants Riley to have fun at camp, while Anxiety focuses on winning a spot on the team and making new friends, especially after learning that Bree and Grace will attend a different high school. While Joy is in control, Riley inadvertently gets the campers punished by the strict camp director, Coach Roberts. Anxiety, deciding that Riley needs to change to fit in with the older players, launches the Sense of Self to the back of Rile's mind and has the original emotions captured and thrown into a memory vault. The new emotions then create a new anxiety-dominated Sense of Self and encourage Riley to befriend popular hockey player Val Ortiz, straining her friendship with Bree and Grace. The old emotions escape the vault; Sadness returns to Headquarters while the others go to retrieve Rile's old Sense of Self. Under Anxiet's control, Riley sneaks into Coach Robert' office and learns from her notebook that she is't considered ready to become a Firehawk. The old emotions find the mountain of negative memories deposited by Jo's mechanism and cause an avalanche that not only expedites their return to headquarters but also causes the negative memories to spill into Rile's current Sense of Self. Anxiety realizes that the Sense of Self she has created for Riley is one of self-doubt, which causes Riley to perform poorly during her final tryout match, accidentally hurt Grace, and get sent to the penalty box . Horrified, Anxiety frantically swarms the console in a blinding whirlwind, causing Riley to suffer from a panic attack . With the help of Sadness and a reformed Embarrassment, the other original emotions return to Headquarters. Joy finds Anxiety still in control but in paralysis ; Joy convinces Anxiety that Riley does't need to change to have a better future. Anxiety relents and Joy reinstates Rile's original Sense of Self, but the panic attack persists. After the repentant Anxiety admits that she cannot determine who Riley is, Joy realizes that the same applies to her. She removes the first Sense of Self and allows a new one to form from Rile's positive and negative memories. The emotions embrace this third Sense of Self, calming Riley and helping her reconcile with Bree and Grace. Joy takes command and helps Riley happily finish the game. Riley befriends Val and the other Firehawks at high school while staying true to herself and maintaining her friendship with Bree and Grace. Living in peace, the original and new emotions work together to protect Riley, who checks her phone for the Firehawk' recruitment results and looks at herself in the mirror with a proud smile. Voice cast Amy Poehler as Joy , a yellow emotion who often takes the lead in Rile's emotional life, and is reluctant to accept any influences that could detract from Rile's happiness  Maya Hawke as Anxiety, a new orange emotion who catastrophizes every situation, with the stated intention of averting bad outcomes for Riley  Kensington Tallman as Riley Andersen, a 13-year-old girl in whose mind the emotions live  Liza Lapira as Disgust, a green emotion who deals with visceral aversion as well as gut reactions like responding to body language  Tony Hale as Fear, a purple emotion responsible for protecting Riley from threats in the physical world  Lewis Black as Anger, a red emotion who also governs aspects of Rile's hockey game when she plays aggressively  Phyllis Smith as Sadness, a blue emotion who helps Riley process upsetting experiences  Ayo Edebiri as Envy, a new cyan emotion who motivates Riley to pursue what others have  Lilimar as Valentina "Val" Ortiz, a popular hockey player at Rile's high school  Grace Lu as Grace, Rile's friend  Sumayyah Nuriddin-Green as Bree, Rile's friend  Adèle Exarchopoulos as Ennui, a new indigo emotion with a French accent who expresses Rile's boredom and also deflects uncomfortable situations with sarcasm, feigned disinterest, or taciturn responses  Diane Lane as Mrs. Andersen, Rile's mother  Kyle MacLachlan as Mr. Andersen, Rile's father  Paul Walter Hauser as Embarrassment, a new pink emotion who, in response to Rile's embarassment, hides his face inside a hoodie  Yvette Nicole Brown as Coach Roberts, a hockey coach and head of the summer hockey camp  Ron Funches as Bloofy, a character from Rile's favorite childhood TV show. He is similar to the hosts of interactive childre's shows such as Blu's Clues or Dora the Explorer .  Yong Yea as Lance Slashblade, a heroic video game character whom Riley was infatuated with when she was younger. He is similar to the character Cloud Strife from Final Fantasy VII .  James Austin Johnson as Pouchy, a talking pouch who is similar to Backpack from Dora the Explorer and Toodles from Mickey Mouse Clubhouse .  Steve Purcell as Deep Dark Secret  Dave Goelz as Mind Cop Frank  Kirk Thatcher as Foreman  Frank Oz as Mind Cop Dave  Paula Pell as Mo's Anger   June Squibb as Nostalgia, a new beige emotion who fondly recalls past events, which due to Rile's youth are always quite recent   Pete Docter as Da's Anger  Paula Poundstone as Forgetter Paula  John Ratzenberger  as Fritz Sarayu Blue as Margie  Flea as Jake   Bobby Moynihan as Forgetter Bobby  Kendall Coyne Schofield as Hockey Announcer  Additionally, television personality Sam Thompson cameos in the UK version of the film as Security Man Sam, a character who finds himself on a chase with the emotions.  Production Development After the success of Inside Out , the seventh-highest-grossing film of 2015 , Entertainment Tonight and The Guardian considered a sequel to be "inevitable".    Inside Out director Pete Docter was germinating ideas for a sequel while the original fil's nominations were unveiled at the 88th Academy Awards in January 2016.  Development on the story began in early 2020 and Pixar officially confirmed the seque's development during the D23 Expo announcement in September 2022, with Amy Poehler coming on stage to discuss the film alongside Docter.  Kelsey Mann was announced as the director of the sequel (making it his feature directorial debut), with Mark Nielsen producing, while Meg LeFauve was announced to write the fil's screenplay, returning from its predecessor.  To utilize "truthful" worldbuilding , Mann used Docte's "five to 27 emotions" idea from the first film that he pitched during its production.  Man's first pass included nine new emotions to make Joy feel overwhelmed with all the new emotions showing up, but felt that the story could not keep track with so many emotions taking the spotlight or not adding to the story, so after the first screening, he decided to simplify the number. Among those emotions was Schadenfreude (having joy at someon's expense), Jealousy and Guilt, but the latter two influenced the film despite being removed, with Mann feeling that Envy could relate to Jealousy and how remnants of Guilt could be found within Anxiet's introduction, even giving Anxiety some of Guil's baggage, which was inspired by that of Disneyland hotels.  Research and writing The production team frequently consulted author and clinical psychologist Lisa Damour and used her books as guidance on accurately portraying how teenager' emotions change during puberty. Professor of psychology at the University of California, Berkeley , Dacher Keltner , who helped on the first Inside Out , returned as a consultant as well. Keltner played a key role in selecting which emotions should be introduced in the story. A character based on the emotion of shame was intended to be a part of the film but was axed, in part due to Keltner contesting that shame was not an emotion.  To assist with the development of the film, Pixar enlisted a group of nine teenagers, who were dubbed "Rile's Crew", to provide feedback on the film to ensure it accurately portrayed modern teenage life. Their input led to the inclusion of the emotion Nostalgia and influenced various scenes, including everyday elements of the emotion' lives and the transition from middle school to high school.   Nielsen and Mann were also inspired by their own daughters when crafting the film. As development on the story began during lockdown due to the COVID-19 pandemic , the two were able to gather personal research from studying their children, some of whom were Rile's age in the film. Their perspective as parents helped in shaping the film and characterizing the emotions, especially Joy.  Initially, the plot of the film was to involve a talent show, but that idea ended up being scrapped. After about three test screenings, Nielsen, Mann, and LeFauve decided it was best to center the story on Riley playing hockey, as they felt it was a unique aspect of her character. The decision was also influenced by input Mann received from Turning Red director Domee Shi when he asked how to make the film unique from other teenage coming-of-age stories, including her own.  The scene where the old emotions are locked in a vault was originally longer but was trimmed down as several gags were cut out due to time constraints.  Casting Poehler accepted an offer of $5 million with lucrative bonuses to reprise her role as Joy from the first film . Phyllis Smith and Lewis Black also reprise their roles from the first film, voicing Sadness and Anger, respectively.  Following a dispute over pay, both Bill Hader and Mindy Kaling declined to reprise their respective roles as Fear and Disgust; they and the rest of the returning cast were reportedly offered $100,000 each, equivalent to two percent of Poehle's salary.  On November 9, 2023, with the release of the teaser trailer, it was revealed that Tony Hale and Liza Lapira would replace Hader and Kaling as Fear and Disgust, respectively, while Maya Hawke joined the cast as Anxiety, a new emotion.  Mann auditioned Hawke via Zoom at the office of a back room in Epcot during a family vacation with his kids after Nielsen told him that Hawke was available to audition just then, with her anxious performance driving him to tears.  On January 16, 2024, it was revealed that June Squibb had joined the cast in an undisclosed role,  later revealed to be Nostalgia.  On March 7, 2024, Disney revealed that Ayo Edebiri , Adèle Exarchopoulos , Paul Walter Hauser , Kensington Tallman, Diane Lane , and Kyle MacLachlan joined the cast, with Edebiri, Exarchopoulos, and Hauser playing the other new emotions, Envy, Ennui, and Embarrassment, respectively.  In addition, Tallman replaces Kaitlyn Dias as Riley Andersen, while Lane reprises her role as Mrs. Andersen, and MacLachlan also reprises his role as Mr. Andersen.  John Ratzenberger reprises his role as Fritz, marking his first voice role in a Pixar film since Onward .  Also joining the cast in supporting roles are Lilimar , who plays a hockey player named Valentina, and Yvette Nicole Brown , who plays the coach of the hockey team, while Sumayyah Nuriddin-Green and Grace Lu play Bree and Grace, Rile's friends.   Music Main article: Inside Out 2 (soundtrack) On March 7, 2024, with the release of the second trailer, it was reported that Andrea Datzman had composed the fil's score, taking over for Michael Giacchino .  This made Datzman the first woman to score a Pixar feature film.   The soundtrack album was released by Walt Disney Records on June 14, 2024, the same day as the film.  Release Inside Out 2 premiered at the El Capitan Theatre in Los Angeles on June 10, 2024,  and was released in theaters in the United States four days later.  It also screened at the 2024 Annecy International Animation Film Festival that same day.  The film was screened in various formats, including RealD 3D , IMAX and Dolby Cinema .  Marketing The teaser trailer for the film, along with the poster, was released on November 9, 2023. James Withbrook of Gizmodo and Inverse's Rotem Rusak highlighted the introduction of three other emotions in the poster: Embarrassment, Ennui, and Envy.   The teaser was viewed over 157 million times in the first 24 hours across all social media platforms—including over 78 million from TikTok —becoming the most-watched animated film trailer launch in the Walt Disney Company's history  , surpassing the previous record holder, Frozen II (2019).  A clip from the film was also aired during the Super Bowl LVIII , named "Team".  The second trailer, along with a new poster, was released on March 7, 2024.  This trailer also marked the debut of the "standard" variant of the 2023 Walt Disney Pictures logo, which was introduced the year before for the studi's centennial anniversary.  The first 35 minutes of the film were screened during the Walt Disney Studios' presentation of first looks at their 2024 theatrical release slate at CinemaCon on April 11, 2024.  As part of a partnership with Airbnb , a new rental home in Nevada just outside of Las Vegas modeled after "headquarters" in the film was listed on the website beginning June 12, 2024.  Reception Box office As of July 9, 2024  , Inside Out 2 has grossed $537.9 million in the United States and Canada, and $696.2 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $1.234 billion.   On a budget of $200 million, Inside Out 2 was initially projected to gross $80–90 million in its domestic opening weekend. The sub-$100 million industry projections were partially due to the notion that general audiences remained hesitant to return to theaters, given the direct-to-streaming releases of the Pixar films Soul (2020), Luca (2021), and Turning Red (2022) on Disney+ , the underperformance of Pixa's Lightyear at the box office in 2022, and the lackluster box office results of several films in 2024.    After making $63.6 million on its first day,  including an estimated $13 million from Thursday night previews, projections were raised to $140–150 million for the weekend.  It ended up grossing $154.2 million domestically from 4,440 theaters and an estimated $140 million from 38 international markets, for a worldwide debut of $294.2 million, the highest in Pixar history.   In the United States and Canada, the $154.2 million opening weekend was the best of 2024, surpassing Dune: Part Two ($82.5 million) and Godzilla x Kong: The New Empire ($80 million) to become the first film of the year to open above $100 million, and the third-best for an animated film behind Pixa's own Incredibles 2 (2018; $182.7 million) and Disne's The Lion King (2019; $191.7 million).  It was also the fourth-best opening for a PG film after The Lion King , Incredibles 2 , and Beauty and the Beast ($174 million). With an average ticket price of $12.53 overall and $10.36 for children, twelve million moviegoers saw the film in its first weekend, nearing the thirteen million admissions for Barbie (2023) in its first three days. It played strongly throughout the day (22% of viewers attended before 1 pm, 35% between 1 pm and 5 pm, 26% between 5 pm and 8 pm, and 17% after 8 pm), benefiting from substantial walk-up business credited to its multi-cultural pull (of the opening weekend audience, 36% identified as Hispanic and Latino). IMAX and Premium Large Formats (PLFs) accounted for 43% of the earnings, while 14% came from 3D showings.    The film found momentum during the weekday, bringing its seven-day total to $255.2 million and reaching multiple box-office milestones,  including the second highest-grossing first Monday for a Pixar film (at $22.4 million),   the highest-grossing first Tuesday for an animated film (at $28.8 million),   the third highest non-opening Wednesday after Star Wars: The Force Awakens (2015; $38 million) and Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker (2019; $32.2 million) that doubled as a record for the Juneteenth federal holiday since it began in 2021 (at $30.1 million),   and the highest-grossing first Thursday for a Pixar film (at $19.6 million).   The film made $101.2 million in its second weekend, a mere 34.4% drop to become the most profitable second weekend for an animated film, topping the $92.3 million earned by The Super Mario Bros. Movie (2023), and the seventh-best second weekend overall. Deadline Hollywood' s Anthony 'Alessandro attributed the feat to heat waves and rainstorms prompting people to visit air-conditioned theaters.   During its third weekend, it beat newcomer A Quiet Place: Day One to remain at the top of the box office with $57.5 million.   On the Fourth of July , it crossed $500 million domestically, and during its fourth weekend, the film made $33.1 million, finishing in second behind Despicable Me 4 .  Worldwide, the film surpassed the gross of its predecessor ($859 million) on June 27, 2024, after sixteen days of release.  On June 30, the film crossed the $1 billion threshold, being the first Disney animated film to do so since Frozen II in 2019. From this, Inside Out 2 became the animated film to cross $1 billion the fastest, doing so in 19 days and beating out The Lion King (21 days).   Critical response On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , 91% of 285 critic' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 7.6/10. The websit's consensus reads: "Spicing things up with the wrinkle of teen angst, Inside Out 2 clears the head and warms the heart by living up to its predecesso's emotional intelligence."  Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned the film a score of 73 out of 100, based on 59 critics, indicating "generally favorable" reviews.  Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale (the same as the first film), while those surveyed by PostTrak gave the film an average of 4.5 out of 5 stars, with 71% saying they would definitely recommend it.  Moira Macdonald of The Seattle Times awarded the film 3 + 1 ⁄ 2 stars out of four, commending the voice cast and the film as "a happy head trip, for any age".  Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph gave the film four stars out of five, praising the animation, metaphors, and wit while saying "the cast-iron ontological brilliance of Docte's original premise bears expansion well".  Owen Gleiberman of Variety praised Hawk's performance as Anxiety and the fil's emotional impact, calling it "the most poignantly perceptive tale of the conundrums of early adolescence since Eighth Grade ".  David Ehrlich of IndieWire gave the film a'C' rating, writing that the film "so perfectly ticks Pixa's boxes in a way that forces the sincerity of its storytelling into a losing battle with the cynicism of its existence".  Accolades

American film distribution studio Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures (previously known as Buena Vista Film Distribution, Buena Vista Distribution, Inc. And Buena Vista Pictures Distribution Inc. ) is an American film distributor within the Disney Entertainment division of the Walt Disney Company .  It handles theatrical and occasional digital distribution, marketing and promotion for films produced and released by the Walt Disney Studios , including Walt Disney Pictures , Walt Disney Animation Studios , Pixar , Marvel Studios , Lucasfilm , 20th Century Studios , and internationally Searchlight Pictures ; which operates its own autonomous theatrical distribution and marketing unit in the United States.  The company was originally established by Walt Disney in 1953 as Buena Vista Film Distribution Company Inc (later renamed Buena Vista Distribution Inc and Buena Vista Pictures Distribution Inc ). It took on its current name in late 2007.   History [ edit ] Before in 1953, Disne's productions were previously distributed by: M.J. Winkler Pictures (1924–1926), Film Booking Offices of America (1926–1927), Universal Pictures (1927–1928), Celebrity Productions (1928–1930), Columbia Pictures (1930–1932), United Artists (1932–1937, and 1943 ), RKO Radio Pictures (1937–1953 ; 1937–1956 ).  Buena Vista [ edit ] See also: Buena Vista (brand) A dispute with RKO Pictures in 1953 over the distribution of The Living Desert , Disne's first full-length film in the True-Life Adventures series,  led Walt and his older brother Roy O. Disney to form its wholly owned subsidiary, the Buena Vista Film Distribution Company, Inc. (BVDC), to handle North American distribution of their own products.  RKO refused to distribute the film.  The name "Buena Vista" came from the eponymus street in Burbank, California, where the Walt Disney Studios was located (and remains to this day). Buena Vist's first release was the Academy Award -winning live-action feature The Living Desert on November 10, 1953, along with Toot, Whistle, Plunk and Boom , Buena Vist's first animated release.  Notable subsequent releases included the Austrian film Victoria in Dover , the Japanese Daiei film Princess Yang Kwei Fei ( Most Noble Lady ), released in US theaters in September 1956,    The Missouri Traveler in March 1958,  and The Big Fisherman in July 1959 (the first third-party production financed by Disney).  By July 5, 1957, RKO Japan, Ltd. was sold to Disney Productions and British Commonwealth Film Corporation. In allocating the foreign film licenses to the company, Disney would use 5 and Commonwealth 8.  In April 1960, the company dropped "Film" from its name.  In 1961, Disney incorporated Buena Vista International (BVI),  distributing its first PG-rated film, Take Down , in January 1979.  The low-budget movie was not produced by the Disney studios and was acquired from an independent studio, making The Black Hole the first PG-rated Disney film.  In July 1987, Buena Vista changed its name to Buena Vista Pictures Distribution, Inc. (BVPD).  Late in the 1980s, Disney purchased a controlling stake in one of Pacific Theatres' chains  leading to Disne's Buena Vista Theaters and Pacific to renovate the El Capitan Theatre and the Crest by 1989.  The Crest was finished first while El Capitan opened with the premiere of The Rocketeer film on June 19, 1991.  In 1992, Buena Vista made production loans totaling $5.6 million to Cinergi Pictures for its film Medicine Man and its 1994 films Renaissance Man and Color of Night and were distributing Cinerg's films. The corporation purchased a 12.8% share in Cinergi with its initial public offering in 1994.  Soon, BVPD signed a 25 picture distribution deal with Cinergi.   The Gaumont Film Company and Disney formed Gaumont Buena Vista International, a joint venture in French distribution, in 1993.  In August 1996, Disney and Tokuma Shoten Publishing agreed that Disney would distribute Studio Ghibli animated films and provide 10% of the production cost of the studi's current in-production film, Spirited Away .    Disney would go on to produce the English dubs and distribute 15 of Ghibl's films, through the Walt Disney Pictures , Buena Vista Home Video , Miramax and Touchstone Pictures banners.  In September 1996, following Disne's acquisition of Capital Cities/ABC , Buena Vista Pictures Distribution, Inc. was merged  into ABC, Inc.,  the parent company of that group. For the November 1995 premiere of Toy Story , Disney rented the Hollywood Masonic Temple —adjacent to the El Capitan Theatre—for Totally Toy Story , a multimedia funhouse and a promotional event for the movie.  On July 17, 1998, Buena Vista Pictures Distribution purchased the Hollywood Masonic Temple building to continue using it as a promotional venue.  By 1997, BVP's share in Cinergi dropped to 5%. After nine films were delivered under the agreement, Cinergi sold Disney on November 22, 1997; all of its 12-film library except for Die Hard with a Vengeance plus $20 million in exchange for Disne's Cinergi share holdings, production advances of $35.4 million and other loans.   In 2002, Disney signed a four animated film deal with Vanguard Animation ;  however, only one film was released under that negotiation.  In 2004, BVI and Gaumont dissolved their French distribution joint venture, Gaumont Buena Vista International.  Buena Vista International agreed to a distribution deal with MegaStar Joint Venture Company Limited in April 2006 for the Vietnam market.  Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures [ edit ] On April 25, 2007, Disney discontinued the usage of the Buena Vista brand in its distribution branding.  In early 2009, Disney entered a distribution agreement with a reorganized DreamWorks ; the deal called for an estimated 30 films over a five-year period from DreamWorks and they would be released through the Touchstone banner.  In 2011, GKIDS acquired the North American theatrical distribution rights of the Ghibli films, with Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment retaining the home video rights until July 2017 when Shout! Factory took over the home video rights. However, Disney only handles home video distribution of the compan's films in Japan and formerly Taiwan and China.   Disne's distribution deal with DreamWorks expired in August 2016, after the two studios decided to not renew their agreement on December 16, 2015, with Universal Pictures replacing Disney as DreamWork' distributor.   By the end of the deal, Disney had distributed 14 of DreamWork's original 30-picture agreement; thirteen through Touchstone and one through Walt Disney Pictures .   Disney took complete ownership rights of those 14 DreamWorks films from Amblin Partners in exchange for loans made to that company.  The Light Between Oceans , the final film in that distribution deal, was also the last film released under the Touchstone banner. On December 14, 2017, the Walt Disney Company announced plans to purchase 21st Century Fox , which included 20th Century Fox and Fox Searchlight Pictures . On March 20, 2019, the acquisition of 21st Century Fox was completed.  Following the reorganization and renaming of the acquired film units, Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures began distributing 20th Century Studios films in the United States while WDSM's Buena Vista International is distributing the studi's films internationally (along with Searchlight), while Searchlight Pictures continued to operate their autonomous distribution unit.   in 2025 Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures will worldwidley distributes 20th Century Studios and Searchlight Pictures movies in theatrically. In late 2020 and early 2021, Disney reorganized the studio, placing it under the Disney Media and Entertainment Distribution unit which also oversees distribution to Disney+ .  Under this structure, the Theatrical Distribution unit oversaw the domestic and international films produced by all the studios within the Walt Disney Studios umbrella.  In February 2023, returning CEO Bob Iger reversed this decision and reorganized the studio again, returning it as a division under the purview of The Walt Disney Studios . Distribution [ edit ] Main article: Lists of Walt Disney Studios films Walt Disney Studios has produced or distributed 35 films that have received nominations for the Academy Award for Best Picture : fifteen from its former Miramax division,  six from Touchstone Pictures , five from Searchlight Pictures , four from Walt Disney Pictures , three from 20th Century Studios , two from Hollywood Pictures , and one from Marvel Studios .     Of those nominated films, five films—Mirama's The English Patient , Shakespeare in Love , Chicago , No Country for Old Men , and Searchligh's Nomadland —have won Best Picture.    Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures currently distributes films from across all units of Walt Disney Studios with the exception of Searchlight Pictures , which maintains its own autonomous distribution and marketing operations for releases in select markets.   Other Disney film units and some third-party studios including: International distribution [ edit ] Main article: Lists of Walt Disney Studios films Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures International was formed in 1961 as Buena Vista International .  On May 4, 1987, despite being industry rivals, Disney signed a theatrical distribution agreement with Warner Bros. International for the release of Disney and Touchstone films in many overseas markets except in Australia and New Zealand , where distribution went through Roadshow Distributors instead (due to Roadshow also theatrically distributing Warner films as well during this period), with Disney retaining full control of all distribution and marketing decisions on their product (one notable practice in this policy is obscuring Warner references in posters and it is credited only in very small text with the exception of some UK posters where sometimes the full logo is shown).  Warner previously had an overseas distribution partnership with Columbia Pictures , but it was dissolved in 1988. In 1992, Disney opted to end their joint venture with Warner Bros. to start autonomously distributing their films in these aforementioned overseas markets beginning with Aladdin , inspiring Warner Bros. to establish the Family Entertainment label to self-distribute family-friendly films under the Warner umbrella at the same period. In those territories from 1993 to 2007, Disney reactivated the Buena Vista International name, and also sent distribution under it in countries that did not have any current arrangements with other companies. [ citation needed ] Disney would then continue its overseas film distribution relationship with Warner Bros. through a home video distribution deal in Europe and Australia in which Warner Home Video distributed select Disney material on DVD from 1999 to 2002, when Disney opted to self-distribute DVDs in these aforementioned territories. Italia Film, a Lebanese film distribution and production company, is Disne's exclusive theatrical film distribution partner for various Middle East and North Africa ( MENA ) markets since 1993, after making a deal directly with Buena Vista International at the time. Prior to this, Warner Bros. originally handled said MENA markets except in Israel where Buena Vista handled theatrical distribution by themselves.  In Taiwan , MGM first handled Disne's distribution, with 20th Century Fox and Warner Bros. later taking over. A local distributor called Era Communications took over distribution from 1992 to 1995. At that time, Buena Vista began its Taiwanese operations. Columbia ended its joint distribution unit with Fox and switched to Buena Vista in 1999.  Rights to Disne's films in West Germany were originally released by MGM (under CIC in the early 1970s) and later to 20th Century Fox , and then to United International Pictures  before the Warner Bros. joint venture. In September 2004, Buena Vista International announced they would begin to start theatrically distributing certain films from Universum Film in Germany and Austria beginning in February 2005, replacing a previous deal with United International Pictures .  The deal ended in late 2019 after Universum was sold by the RTL Group to Tele München Group , who began to self-distribute releases afterwards under the Leonine Distribution name. In Spain , Filmayer S.A. originally released Disne's movies, with Warner Española S.A. later taking over. In the United Kingdom , Disne's movies were released through a collaboration of Disney and 20th Century Fox known as UK Film Distributors Ltd. before the Warner Bros. joint venture. In Italy and Brazil , Disne's movies were distributed by Cinema International Corporation and United International Pictures before the Warner Bros. joint venture. In Australia and New Zealand , Disne's movies were distributed initially by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer , before distribution switched to British Empire Films (later Greater Union Film Distributors ) following the merger of the Australian MGM cinema chains until the latter merged with Village Roadshow in 1987 and Roadshow Films took over distribution.  The company begin distributing films in Australia and New Zealand in 1999 after its own distribution deal with Roadshow expired in 1998.  In some other countries in Europe, such as Poland , Hungary and the Czech Republic , Disne's movies were instead released through local distributors, such as Filmoteka Narodowa in Poland, InterCom Zrt. in Hungary and Guild Film Distribution in the Czech Republic respectively. Disney and Sony Pictures formed in 1997 a film distribution joint venture in Southeast Asia.  By December 2006, 14 joint distribution ventures with Sony Pictures Releasing International were formed and exist in countries including Brazil , Mexico , Singapore , Thailand and the Philippines . In January 2007, their fifteenth such partnership began operations in Russia and CIS .  In February 2017, Sony starting leaving the Southeast Asia venture with the Philippines. On August 14, 2017, Sony terminated the joint venture agreement for their own operations.  On January 31, 2019, in anticipation of the then-pending acquisition of the most 21st Century Fox assets (which includes 20th Century Fox), Disney agreed to sell its stake in the Mexican joint venture named Walt Disney Studios Sony Pictures Releasing de México to Sony Pictures Releasing .  In Greece and Cyprus , Disne's movies are distributed through local distributor Feelgood Entertainment, which also distributes Sony Pictures films in those territories. In Japan, to adapt Japa's theatrical and home media distribution model, Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures Japan and Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment Japan were merged as Walt Disney Studios Japan on March 1, 2010, the distribution unit was renamed Walt Disney Japan on November 22, 2016.  In China , due to its regulated policies on international film distribution, all of Disne's films in China are distributed by China Film Co., Ltd. and/or Huaxia Film Distribution , but Disney still hold all promotional rights of their films unless i's sold to third-party companies. Disney distributed the 2008 Indian Tamil film Dasavathaaram in Canada under the Buena Vista International banner.  The Australian-produced film Subdivision was released in the Australian and New Zealand theaters on August 20, 2009, by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures under the Buena Vista International label in Australia with Lightning Entertainment handling the international distribution. On October 3, 2017, it was announced that Disney would be handling international distribution of M. Night Shyamalan's Glass , released in early 2019, through the Buena Vista International banner. The film is a sequel to his earlier films Unbreakable (distributed by Disney through Touchstone) and Split (distributed by Universal Pictures ). Through an arrangement made with Disney, Universal retained domestic rights to the film, while Disney distributed in international territories under the label.  The UK-produced film Patrick was also released in 2018 by Disney under the Buena Vista International label in the UK.  Missing Link was also released by Disney under Buena Vista International in Latin America, Russia and some countries in Asia.   Since 2020, and in the UK from 2020 to 2023, Buena Vista International is the international distributor of 20th Century Studios and Searchlight Pictures films outside the United States as in North America the 20th Century films are distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures and Searchlight films are distributed by Searchlight Pictures itself. Starting with The Boogeyman and Theater Camp ,   20th Century and Searchlight films are now distributed in the UK through Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures International, replacing Buena Vista International. However, BVI continues to distribute 20th Century and Searchlight films elsewhere (particularly in Europe). On February 11, 2022, the Latin American branch of Buena Vista International was renamed Star Distribution , as the Star branding replaced the Buena Vista brand company-wide in the Latin American region by Disney Latin America .  On November 3, 2022, the Brazilian branch of Buena Vista International was also renamed Star Distribution following the dropping of the Buena Vista brand in the Latin American region on February 11, 2022. However, the Buena Vista International name is still used on Latin American and Brazilian prints of 20th Century/Searchlight titles.   Film library [ edit ] Main article: Lists of Walt Disney Studios films Highest-grossing films [ edit ] Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures has released the most films that have crossed the $1 billion mark (twenty-seven, in worldwide grosses among major Hollywood studios ), with thirteen of the twenty highest-grossing films of all time being distributed by Disney; including the highest-grossing film in North America ( Star Wars: The Force Awakens )  Of those thirteen films, four of them have crossed the $2 billion mark in worldwide grosses, the most for any studio. Disney has directly distributed three of the top five highest-grossing films in history ( Avengers: Endgame , Avatar: The Way of Water , and Star Wars: The Force Awakens ) and has owned the rights to the other two films ( Avatar and Titanic ) since their release.  In addition, Disney is the first of only three studios that have released at least two billion-dollar films in the same year (the others being Warner Bros. and Universal Pictures ).  Furthermore, Disney is the only studio that has achieved this seven times, in 2010, 2013, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, and 2019. 2016 included four $1 billion releases, and 2019 included seven $1 billion releases, both records for any studio. Eight of the top ten highest-grossing animated films have been released by Disney, as well as sixteen of the twenty highest-grossing G-rated films.  In addition, four of the top five opening weekends were Disney releases.  In 2015, Disney achieved its largest yearly box-office gross worldwide and in North America.   In 2016, Disney surpassed $7 billion in worldwide yearly box-office gross—the first of any major studio—surpassing the previous 2015 record.  In 2019, Disney became the first studio ever to have seven releases cross $1 billion each in a single year. In the same year, Disney broke the previous records by making an unprecedented $13.2 billion at the global box office.  † Indicates films playing in theaters in the week commencing 5 July 2024. ‡ —Includes theatrical reissue(s)

2024 American film by Denis Villeneuve Dune: Part Two is a 2024 American epic science fiction film directed and produced by Denis Villeneuve , who co-wrote the screenplay with Jon Spaihts . The sequel to Dune (2021), it is the second of a two-part adaptation of the 1965 novel Dune by Frank Herbert . It follows Paul Atreides as he unites with the Fremen people of the desert planet Arrakis to wage war against House Harkonnen . Timothée Chalamet , Rebecca Ferguson , Josh Brolin , Stellan Skarsgård , Dave Bautista , Zendaya , Charlotte Rampling , and Javier Bardem reprise their roles from the first film, with Austin Butler , Florence Pugh , Christopher Walken and Léa Seydoux joining the ensemble cast . Development began after Legendary Entertainment acquired film and television rights for the Dune franchise in 2016. Villeneuve signed on as director in 2017, intending to make a two-part adaptation of the novel due to its complexity. Production contracts were only secured for the first film, with the second film having to be greenlit based on the firs's success. After the critical and commercial success of the first film, Legendary green-lit Dune: Part Two in October 2021. Principal photography took place in Budapest, Italy, Jordan, and Abu Dhabi between July and December 2022. After being delayed from an original November 2023 release date due to the 2023 Hollywood labor disputes , the film premiered at the Auditorio Nacional in Mexico City , on February 6, 2024, and was released in the United States on March 1, to critical acclaim. It set several box office records and has grossed over $712 million worldwide, surpassing its predecessor and making it the second-highest-grossing film of 2024 and the highest-grossing film in Villeneuv's career. A sequel based on Herber's 1969 novel Dune Messiah is in development. Plot [ edit ] Following the destruction of House Atreides by House Harkonnen , Princess Irulan , the daughter of Padishah Emperor Shaddam IV , journals about her fathe's betrayal of the Atreides. On Arrakis , Stilgar's Fremen troops accompany Paul Atreides and his pregnant Bene Gesserit mother, Lady Jessica , to Sietch Tabr . Some Fremen suspect they are spies, while Stilgar and others see signs of the prophecy that a mother and son from the "Outer World" will bring prosperity to Arrakis. The Fremen accept Paul but Stilgar tells Jessica she must succeed Sietch Tab's dying Reverend Mother by drinking the Water of Life —a drug fatal for males and untrained women. She uses her Bene Gesserit training to transmute the liquid and survive, inheriting the memories of all past Reverend Mothers. The liquid prematurely awakens the mind of her unborn daughter, Alia , allowing Jessica to communicate with her. They agree to focus on convincing the more skeptical northern Fremen of the prophecy. Chani and her friend, Shishakli, correctly believe the prophecy was fabricated to manipulate the Fremen, but Chani begins to respect Paul after he declares that he only intends to fight alongside the Fremen, not to rule them. Paul and Chani fall in love as Paul immerses himself in Fremen culture: learning their language, becoming a Fedaykin fighter, riding a sandworm , and raiding Harkonnen spice operations. Paul adopts the Fremen names "Usul" and "Mua'Dib". Due to the continuing spice raids, Baron Vladimir Harkonnen replaces his nephew, Rabban , as Arraki's ruler with his cunning and psychopathic younger nephew, Feyd-Rautha . Lady Margot Fenring , a Bene Gesserit, is sent to evaluate Feyd-Rautha as a prospective Kwisatz Haderach and secure his genetic lineage. Jessica travels south to unite with Fremen fundamentalists who believe most strongly in the prophecy. Paul remains in the north, fearful that his visions of an apocalyptic holy war will come to pass if he goes south as a messiah . During a raid on a smuggler spice harvester, Paul reunites with Gurney Halleck , who leads Paul to the hidden atomic warhead stockpile of House Atreides. Feyd-Rautha unleashes a devastating attack on the northern Fremen, destroying Sietch Tabr, killing Shishakli, and forcing Paul and the survivors to journey south. Upon arrival, Paul drinks the Water of Life and falls into a coma. This angers Chani, but Jessica compels her to mix her tears with the liquid, which awakens Paul. Now possessing a partial clairvoyance across space and time, Paul sees an adult Alia on water-filled Arrakis. He also sees a singular path to victory among all possible futures, and that Jessica is Baron Harkonne's daughter. Paul meets with the southern Fremen war council, galvanizing the crowd by demonstrating his ability to discern their deepest thoughts. He declares himself the Lisan al Gaib and sends a challenge to Shaddam, who arrives on Arrakis with Irulan and the Sardaukar . As Shaddam chastises the Harkonnens for their failures, the Fremen launch an offensive, using atomics and sandworms to overpower the Sardaukar. Paul executes the Baron and captures Shaddam and his entourage. Meanwhile, Gurney leads an assault on Arrakeen, intercepting and killing Rabban. Paul challenges Shaddam for the throne and, to Chan's dismay, demands to marry Irulan. Previously summoned by the Baron, the Great Houses arrive in orbit, ready to invade the planet, but Paul threatens to destroy the spice fields with atomic weapons if they intervene. Feyd-Rautha volunteers to be Shadda's champion, and Paul kills him in a duel. Irulan agrees to Pau's request for marriage on the condition that her father lives. Shaddam surrenders, but the Great Houses reject Pau's ascendancy, so he orders the Fremen to attack the orbiting fleet. As Stilgar leads the Fremen onto the captured Sardaukar ships, Jessica and Alia reflect on the beginning of Pau's holy war. Chani refuses to bow to Paul and departs alone on a sandworm. Cast [ edit ] Timothée Chalamet as Paul Atreides , the exiled Duke of House Atreides who sides with the Fremen to overthrow the tyrannical House Harkonnen Zendaya as Chani , a young and rebellious Fremen warrior who is Pau's love interest  Rebecca Ferguson as Lady Jessica , Pau's Bene Gesserit mother and concubine to Pau's late father and predecessor, Leto Atreides Josh Brolin as Gurney Halleck , the former military leader of House Atreides and Pau's mentor and friend Austin Butler as Feyd-Rautha , Baron Vladimir Harkonne's youngest nephew and heir ("na-Baron") to House Harkonnen Florence Pugh as Princess Irulan , the Empero's eldest daughter, heiress presumptive and Bene Gesserit initiate. Dave Bautista as Rabban , nephew of Baron Vladimir Harkonnen and older brother of Feyd-Rautha Christopher Walken as Emperor Shaddam IV , the Padishah Emperor of the Known Universe and head of House Corrino Léa Seydoux as Lady Margot Fenring , a Bene Gesserit and close friend of the Emperor Souheila Yacoub as Shishakli, a Fremen warrior and Chan's friend Stellan Skarsgård as Baron Vladimir Harkonnen , head of House Harkonnen and former steward of Arrakis, enemy to the Atreides, uncle of Feyd-Rautha and Glossu Rabban Charlotte Rampling as Reverend Mother Mohiam , a Bene Gesserit Reverend Mother and the Empero's Truthsayer Javier Bardem as Stilgar , leader of the Fremen tribe at Sietch Tabr Anya Taylor-Joy makes an uncredited cameo appearance as Alia Atreides , Pau's unborn sister who appears in his visions as well as communicating to Jessica while in her womb.   Babs Olusanmokun and Roger Yuan reprise their roles from the first film as Jamis and Lieutenant Lanville, respectively. Stephen McKinley Henderson filmed scenes reprising his role as Thufir Hawat , while Tim Blake Nelson filmed scenes as an undisclosed character,   but their scenes were not included in the final cut. Both were given a "Special Thanks" credit by Villeneuve.  Production [ edit ] Development [ edit ] Denis Villeneuve returned to direct and co-write Dune: Part Two . In November 2016, Legendary Pictures obtained the film and TV rights for the Dune franchise , based on the eponymous 1965 novel by Frank Herbert .  Vice chair of worldwide production for Legendary Mary Parent began discussing with Denis Villeneuve about directing a film adaptation, quickly hiring him after realizing his passion for Dune .  In February 2018, Villeneuve was confirmed to be hired as director, and intended to adapt the novel as a two-part film series.   Villeneuve ultimately secured a two-film deal with Warner Bros. Pictures , in the same style as the two-part adaption of Stephen King's It in 2017 and 2019 .  In January 2019, Joe Walker was confirmed as the fil's editor.  Other crew included Brad Riker as supervising art director, Patrice Vermette as production designer, Paul Lambert as visual effects supervisor, Gerd Nefzer as special effects supervisor, and Thomas Struthers as stunt coordinator.  Dune: Part Two was produced by Villeneuve, Mary Parent , and Cale Boyter, with Tanya Lapointe, Brian Herbert , Byron Merritt, Kim Herbert, Thomas Tull , Jon Spaihts, Richard P. Rubinstein, John Harrison , and Herbert W. Gain serving as executive producers and Kevin J. Anderson as creative consultant.  Legendary CEO Joshua Grode confirmed in April 2019 that they plan to make a sequel, adding that "ther's a logical place to stop the  movie before the book is over".  In December 2020, Villeneuve stated that due to Warner Bros' plan to release the film in theaters and on HBO Max simultaneously, the first film could underperform financially, resulting in cancellation of the planned sequel.  In an IMAX screening of the first fil's first ten minutes, the title logo read Dune: Part One , lending credence to plans for the sequel.  In August 2021, Villeneuve spoke more confidently about the chances of a sequel film, iterating his excitement to work with Timothée Chalamet and Zendaya again,  while stating Chani would have a bigger role in the sequel.  Warner Bros. assured Villeneuve a sequel would be greenlit as long as the film performed well on HBO Max.  Just days prior to the first fil's release, Warner Bros. CEO Ann Sarnoff stated, "Will we have a sequel to Dune ? If you watch the movie you see how it ends. I think you pretty much know the answer to that."  On October 26, 2021, Legendary officially greenlit Dune: Part Two , with a spokesperson for the company stating, "We would not have gotten to this point without the extraordinary vision of Denis and the amazing work of his talented crew, the writers, our stellar cast, our partners at Warner Bros., and of course the fans! Her's to more Dune ."  Production work had occurred back-to-back with the first film, as Villeneuve and his wife Lapointe immediately took a flight to Budapest in order to begin pre-production work.  A key point of negotiation prior to greenlighting the sequel was assuring that the sequel would have an exclusive window where it would only be shown theatrically, with Legendary and Warner Bros. agreeing to give Dune: Part Two a 45-day window before it would be available through other channels. Villeneuve said this theatrical exclusivity was a "non-negotiable condition", and that "the theatrical experience is at the very heart of the cinematic language for me".  With Dune: Part Two being greenlit, Villeneuve said that his primary concern was to complete the filming as soon as possible, with the earliest he expected to start in the last quarter of 2022. He noted that production would be expedited by the work already done for the first film.  Writing [ edit ] (Left to right) Timothée Chalamet , Zendaya , and Rebecca Ferguson returned as Paul Atreides, Chani, and Lady Jessica, respectively. Eric Roth was hired to co-write the screenplay in April 2017 for the Dune films,  and Jon Spaihts was later confirmed to be co-writing the script alongside Roth and Villeneuve.  Game of Thrones language creator David Peterson was confirmed to be developing languages for the film in April 2019.  Villeneuve and Peterson had created the Chakobsa language, which was used by actors on set.  In November 2019, Spaihts stepped down as show-runner for Dune: Prophecy to focus on Dune: Part Two .  In June 2020, Greig Fraser said, "I's a fully formed story in itself with places to go. I's a fully standalone epic film that people will get a lot out of when they see it".  Between the release of Dune and the confirmation of Dune: Part Two , Villeneuve started working the script in a way that production could begin immediately once the film was greenlit.  By February 2021, Roth created a full treatment for the sequel,  with writing beginning that August.  He confirmed that Feyd-Rautha would appear in the film, and stated he will be a "very important character".  In March 2022, Villeneuve had mostly finished writing the screenplay.  Craig Mazin and Roth wrote additional literary material for the film.  Villeneuve stated that the film would continue directly from the first, and specifically described it as being the "second part".  He described the film as being an "epic war movie", adding that while the first film was more "contemplative", the second would feature more action.  Villeneuve sought to anchor the movie to the characters, primarily Paul and Chani. With the two featured in an "epic love story" between them, Villeneuve described them as the "epicenter of the story". Zendaya initially found difficulty in creating dialogue, commenting that "It was funny trying to figure out in this futuristic space talk, like, how do they flirt?" Chalamet also added that Paul would be heavily influenced by Chani, serving as his "moral compass". Paul becomes deeply embedded in Fremen culture, developing a closer bond with Stilgar, who becomes his surrogate father figure and mentor, while tensions emerge between Chani and Lady Jessica, as Chani is aware that Jessic's schemes negatively impact the Fremen.  The script ultimately conveys Chani as a nonbeliever of the prophecy and intended for its structure to first convey their romantic relationship from Pau's perspective, and eventually pivot to Chan's perspective as the audience realizes Pau's desire for power and insidious nature.  He focused on Herber's original intention to depict Paul as an antihero in Dune , on his way to becoming a villain, and wrote the script with that in mind while also considering his future plans regarding Dune Messiah, particularly by modifying Chan's characterization as he felt that she eventually "disappeared in Pau's shadows" in the book.   Feeling he had the "benefit of time" in doing so, Villeneuve decided to use all the elements of Pau's character arc and "play them a bit differently" in order to establish his eventual transformation into a villainous figure and becoming "what he was trying to fight against".  He expanded the role of Chani and Lady Jessica from the novel, and interpreted Chani as being a critique of power.  When envisioning the sandworm sequence, Villeneuve primarily relied upon his own drawings and storyboards, as he felt the book did not contain adequate descriptions. He later cited it as being one of his favorite scenes in the film.  When writing Pau's character arc, he considered Paul as transforming from a "humble" figure to a "dark messianic figure", and took inspiration from Katsuhiro Otomo's Akira (1988) when designing the storyboards.  Villeneuve felt the fil's ending was more "tragic" than that of the book, feeling that it adequately resolved Pau's storyline across the Dune films while setting up his character arc for a potential third film based on Dune Messiah (1969).  Following the first film, Baron Vladimir Harkonnen is described as being heavily debilitated and reliant upon being submerged in fluids, while focusing on choosing an heir: Glossu "Beast" Rabban or Feyd-Rautha, both his nephews. Rabban was regarded as being a bad strategist, while Feyd-Rautha is shown to be clever, cunning, and charismatic.  Actor Austin Butler felt Feyd-Rauth's character served as "flip sides of the same coin" to Paul, as both had been involved in the Bene Gesseri's genetic breeding program. Butler opined that Feyd-Rauth's upbringing on Giedi Prime and self-care for his body explained his arrogance. Meanwhile, Villeneuve noted his psychopathic personality and brutality similar to that of an animal, contrasted with his "code of honors" and reverence for fighters.  Lady Jessica is heavily traumatized by the death of Duke Leto, being compared to Paul as a "survivor" and strategizing to realize the ambitions of the Bene Gesserit, who aim to fulfill their prophecy to maximize human potential, disregarding morality and ethics. There is additional focus on the political aspect, with Princess Irulan fearing that her father, Emperor Shaddam IV, will lose his throne due to his loss of influence over warring factions.  During the sequence of Pau's consumption of the Water of Life, Villeneuve deliberately altered the timeframe to depict an adult Alia for a dramatic effect, and to highlight Ali's unique birth. He and Spaihts decided to "compress" the time for both the sequence and Lady Jessic's pregnancy in order to establish more narrative tension. He added that Lady Jessic's conversations with an embryonic Alia was unique, as he felt it was "fresh and original to have a character who is powerful and still a pregnant woman" while also conveying how others perceive Alia as an "abomination".  Like Chani and Lady Jessica, Villeneuve further developed Princess Irula's character and motivations from the novel, with actress Florence Pugh noting her reserved nature and intelligence.  Casting [ edit ] (Left to right) Austin Butler , Florence Pugh , and Christopher Walken joined the cast as Feyd-Rautha, Princess Irulan, and Shaddam IV, respectively. In March 2022, Pugh and Butler were reported to be in talks to star in the film as Princess Irulan and Harkonnen heir Feyd-Rautha , respectively.   Butler was offered the role while having coffee with Villeneuve, without needing to audition. He trained for four months in Budapest , using a fitness regimen made by an ex- Navy SEALs member.   Villeneuve described his performance as being a "cross between a psychopath killer, an Olympic sword master, a snake, and Mick Jagger " while Butler researched past cultures he felt "bred brutality" and took inspiration from various animals including sharks and snakes.   Butler said that he drew inspiration from Gary Oldman and Heath Ledger for his performance.  He imitated Skarsgår's voice as the Baron, as he felt that Feyd would be influenced by the Baron due to growing up with him.  In May, Christopher Walken joined the cast as Shaddam IV .  In June, Léa Seydoux entered negotiations to join the cast as Lady Margot Fenring .  In July, Souheila Yacoub joined the cast as Shishakli.  In January 2023, Tim Blake Nelson was added to the cast in an undisclosed role.  Attending the fil's London premiere in February 2024, Anya Taylor-Joy confirmed that she had been cast in the film.  Villeneuve was surprised that her role had been kept a secret for that long, noting it required "so much work to keep that secret". Her role had been revealed in a casting credit list for the film on Letterboxd .  Filming [ edit ] Pre-shooting began on July 4, 2022, at the Brion tomb in Altivole , Italy for two days.  Principal photography was set to begin on July 21 in Budapest , Hungary,  but began earlier on July 18.   The film was entirely shot using Arri Alexa LF digital cameras , with new filming locations and sets being used "to avoid repetition".  In October 2022, Chalamet took a break from filming in order to attend the premiere of Bones and All (2022).  The production team managed to shoot during the partial solar eclipse of October 25 , and used the footage for the opening fight scene between Harkonnen and Fremen soldiers.  In November, production moved to Abu Dhabi , with Pugh finishing her scenes in November.   Certain scenes set at dawn had to be filmed across three days to take advantage of the golden hour .  A special unit of production filmed scenes with Taylor-Joy in Namibia , the driest country in sub-Saharan Africa .  Filming wrapped on December 12, 2022.  Due to the delays, Villeneuve was able to make a film transfer for projection using the IMAX 70 mm and conventional 70 mm film formats.  Pugh delivered Princess Irula's opening narration during her first day of filming and for overall production.  Villeneuve and cinematographer Greig Fraser filmed Feyd-Rauth's gladiator sequence with specially designed black-and-white infrared cameras. They wanted the Harkonnens to cheer and stomp rather than applaud, and designed over 30 sections for spectators in the arena.  Butler spent his first week on set filming the scene, while the set had very high temperatures that caused some people to faint.  He also improvised his kiss scene with the Baron.  For romantic scenes between Paul and Chani, the scenes were primarily filmed in remote locations in Jordan during the golden hour . The scenes were often filmed as quickly as possible, with only a one-hour window being available.  The scene of Pau's sandworm ride was filmed practically on a production unit, separate from the main one, led by producer Tanya Lapointe and a special team. Chalamet filmed his scenes on a platform meant to imitate a portion of the sandworm, with gripping devices serving as the reference for the Fremen hooks. An industrial fan blew sand on set to emulate the desert climate.  Chalamet estimated the scene took over three months to film, with individual shoots occurring over a span of 20–30 minutes. As the actual sandworm was not built and there were no reference shots, the production team designed a small portion of the worm on set and the actors had to physically visualize and imitate riding the sandworm.   Butler and Chalamet separately trained with a Kali instructor in Los Angeles for the climactic battle between Paul and Feyd-Rautha. They were excited to do the scene, and immediately began practicing once they later met in Budapest. They performed the scene by themselves, including for wide camera shots. Chalamet delivers the monologue entirely in Chakobsa .   Ferguson cited Lady Jessica undergoing the Reverend Mother process as her favorite scene, working with contortionists for the scene and comparing it to an Exorcist film.  Music [ edit ] Hans Zimmer returned to compose the score of Dune: Part Two . Hans Zimmer returned to compose the fil's score after doing so for the previous film .  Zimmer had composed over 90 minutes of music prior to the announcement of the film to help give Villeneuve inspiration when writing.  Two singles were released on February 15, 2024, by WaterTower Music , titled "A Time of Quiet Between the Storms" and "Harvester Attack". The full soundtrack album was released on February 23.  Marketing [ edit ] A teaser trailer for Dune: Part Two was presented during the Warner Bros. panel at CinemaCon on April 27, 2023.   First-look footage of the cast in-character were released online, alongside a teaser poster, on May 2, 2023.  The trailer was released to the public the following day.  Variety called it "breathtaking";  GQ hailed the shots of Paul riding a sandworm as "the standout sequence";  and Fangoria remarked "If yo're not excited for this one, we dunno what to tell you".  Chalamet and Zendaya later discussed and promoted the film at a Warner Bros. presentation at CineEurope on June 21.  A second trailer was released on June 29, 2023.  Chris Evangelista of Film was excited about the appearance of Christopher Walken as Emperor Shaddam IV.  Ben Travis of Empire praised the "seismic" and "astounding, none-more-eye-boggling" imagery, feeling the scope to be "particularly expansive" and noted the monochromatic footage depicting Austin Butle's Feyd-Rautha while calling the footage of Christopher Walke's appearance "impactful".  Joshua Rivera of Polygon opined "The trailer, simply put, rocks" and enjoyed the footage present.  The film was promoted during the December 2023 CCXP with Chalamet, Zendaya, Pugh, Butler, and Villeneuve, where over 10 minutes of footage was released.  Additional footage from Dune: Part Two was shown during a limited IMAX theatrical re-release of Christopher Nolan's Tenet (2020), as part of Warner Bros' celebration for the former fil's release.   Warner Bros. and Legendary Pictures partnered with Xbox to provide an immersive content suite related to the film, and visual designs inspired by the film being featured on a floating controller, Xbox Series X , and a console holder. Microsoft Flight Simulator also included an expansion pack allowing players to explore Arrakis and pilot the Royal Atreides Ornithopter .  In November 2023, the Sardaukar were added to Call of Duty: Modern Warfare II (2022) in a collaboration pack.  A month later, Paul and Feyd-Rautha were added as playable operators to its sequel, Call of Duty: Modern Warfare III (2023), with an additional Harkonnen soldier skin being announced in March 2024.   In September 2023, McFarlane Toys announced a new line of 7-inch figures modeled after characters from the sequel film.  Legendary Comics will release Dune: Part Two – The Official Movie Graphic Novel with the help of Kickstarter in the same way the previous adaptation was published.  Research conducted by Nikolaj Mathies, CEO of Vievo Media, said the promotional campaign for the film on TikTok included 117 posts over a year leading up to its release, an increase from the first fil's 108. Messages directly from the cast comprised 24% of the content, with videos featuring Zendaya and Chalamet generating significantly higher viewership. Red carpet content was prioritized to appeal to female audiences, a tactic that contributed to an estimated $2 million increase in the opening box office. According to the marketing research company FanBox, 57% of TikTok users are female and hashtags such as #zendaya have garnered billions of views, leading the core audience for Dune to grow significantly, with a 67.5% increase overall from 2.6 million to 8 million and an 84% increase among "superfans".  Promotion in Japan also included a collaboration with Mobile Suit Gundam SEED – specifically, their Freedom film. The collaboration featured an alternate version of Dune: Part Tw' s movie poster featuring Lacus Clyne (voiced by Rie Tanaka in the original and Stephanie Sheh in the English dubbed version) and Kira Yamato ( Sōichirō Hoshi / Max Mittelman ) in place of Chani and Paul respectively.  Popcorn bucket meme [ edit ] A YouTuber holding the popcorn bucket that resulted in viral Internet memes In January 2024, images of a forthcoming Dune -themed popcorn bucket from AMC Theatres went viral and became an Internet meme after its sandworm-inspired design was compared to an artificial vagina .    Reactions to the bucket received millions of views on the social network TikTok ,  and jokes about it were featured on US late night television , including a musical sketch on Saturday Night Live with cast members Marcello Hernandez , Ayo Edebiri , Devon Walker , and Bowen Yang .   The extensive online attention paid to the bucket led the media to ask much of Dune: Part Two' s main cast for their reactions.  Denis Villeneuve said that the bucket was an "insane marketing idea"  that "brought a lot of laughter and joy".  Griffin Newman in The New York Times chalked up the bucke's appeal to the "magic alchemy" that results from an object that so many people become "perversely fascinated" by.  The product was one of several popcorn buckets AMC had designed and released alongside recent films, including character heads for Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse and "burn books" for Mean Girls .  Over a month after Dune: Part Two' s release, AM's chief content officer stated that "we would have never created [the bucket] knowing it would be celebrated or mocked", but added that they would continue to create collectible popcorn buckets for other films.  At that time, the Dune popcorn buckets were being resold for as high as $175.  In the wake of its viral popularity from that period, Marvel Studios would later announce a bucket of their own for Deadpool & Wolverine (2024) in a similar fashion as producer Kevin Feige described it as "intentionally crude and lewd".  The bucket was fully revealed at the end of May 2024 by the fil's star, Ryan Reynolds on his YouTube channel.  Release [ edit ] Theatrical [ edit ] Dune: Part Two was originally scheduled to be released on October 20, 2023,  but was delayed to November 17, 2023,  before moving forward two weeks to November 3, 2023, to adjust to changes in release schedules from other studios.  It was later postponed by over four months to March 15, 2024, due to the 2023 Hollywood labor disputes .  After the strikes were resolved, the film moved once more up two weeks to March 1, 2024.  Following the success of Oppenheimer (2023) in the format, Dune: Part Two was released in the IMAX 15-perforation 70 mm format to twelve venues worldwide,  and in standard 5-perforation 70 mm format to 38 venues worldwide.  Dune: Part Two' s world premiere was hosted in the Auditorio Nacional in Mexico City on February 6, 2024.  Another premiere was held at Odeon Luxe Leicester Square in London on February 15.   On January 16, 2024, the film was shown to a dying man in a palliative care home in the Canadian city of Saguenay , in Denis Villeneuv's native province of Quebec .   The man had expressed a wish to see Dune: Part Two before his death. Josée Gagnon, the cofounder of a company aiming to accompany people at the end of life, relayed his wish to Villeneuve and Tanya Lapointe , his partner and one of the fil's producers, through a viral call-out on Facebook . According to Gagnon, Villeneuve and Lapointe "were very touched".  The pair initially offered to invite the man to see Dune: Part Two in Los Angeles or Montreal , but since he was too weak to travel, Villeneuve eventually decided to send one of his assistants directly to Saguenay with his private laptop.   The film was screened in a room of the care facility, where everyone was required to hand in their cellphones and sign waivers .  The man was in too much pain to watch the entire film and stopped halfway through.  He eventually died on January 25.  This act, which the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation referred to as the actual "world premiere" of the film, was publicly disclosed after its theatrical release.   Home media [ edit ] The film was released digitally on April 16, 2024, and Blu-ray , DVD and Ultra HD Blu-ray on May 14, 2024, by Warner Bros. Home Entertainment .  Dune: Part Two became available to stream on Max on May 21, 2024.  Reception [ edit ] Box office [ edit ] As of May 20, 2024  , Dune: Part Two has grossed $282.1 million in the United States and Canada and $429.7 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $712 million.   The Hollywood Reporter had estimated that the film would break-even after grossing around $500 million.  The film made over $145 million in IMAX alone globally.  In the United States and Canada, the fil's advanced ticket sales surpassed those of Oppenheimer (2023), and it was projected to gross $65–80 million from 4,050 theaters in its opening weekend.  The film made $32.2 million on its first day, including $12 million from previews on February 25 and 29; IMAX screenings made up $4.5 million (38%) of the early totals.  It went on to debut to $82.5 million,  doubling the first fil's $41 million opening weekend; IMAX screenings made up $18.5 million (23%) of the total, a record for a March release.   According to Jeff Goldstein, president of domestic distribution at Warner Bros.,  it was "much higher than any of us could predict", especially for "a genre that is a hard nut to crack".  In its second weekend the film made $46 million (a 44% drop), finishing second behind newcomer Kung Fu Panda 4 . It also surpassed the entire domestic gross of the first film ($108 million) in just seven days.  The film made $28.5 million in its third weekend and $17.6 million in its fourth, remaining in second both times.   It also became Timothée Chalame's highest-grossing film of all time, surpassing Wonka .  Outside the US and Canada, the film was expected to gross $85–90 million from 71 markets in its opening weekend.  It grossed $100.02 million in the first three days.  In its second weekend, the sci-fi epic added $81 million from 72 international markets, including a $20 million opening in China.  Dune: Part Two continued to hold well, grossing $51.2 million and $30.7 million in its third and fourth weekends respectively.   As of April 14, 2024, the highest grossing markets were the United Kingdom ($48.1 million), China ($48.1 million), France ($41.8 million), Germany ($38.7 million), and Australia ($22 million).  Critical response [ edit ] The film "largely received rave reviews from critics",    and was praised for its visual effects and cast performances. Some reviews considered it one of the greatest science fiction films ever made.   On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , 92% of 434 critic' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.3/10. The websit's consensus reads: "Visually thrilling and narratively epic, Dune: Part Two continues Denis Villeneuv's adaptation of the beloved sci-fi series in spectacular form."  Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned the film a score of 79 out of 100, based on 62 critics, indicating "generally favorable" reviews.  Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale, up from the first fil's "A-," while those polled by PostTrak gave it a 94% overall positive score, with 80% saying they would definitely recommend it.  Richard Roeper , writing for the Chicago Sun-Times , gave the film three stars out of four, praising the technical and narrative aspects, saying, "Even as we marvel at the stunning and immersive and Oscar-level cinematography, editing, score, visual effects, production design and sound in Denis Villeneuv's Dune: Part Two , w're reminded at every turn that this is an absolutely bat-bleep [ sic ] crazy story."  Filmmaker Steven Spielberg praised the film, calling it "one of the most brilliant science fiction films I have ever seen," while further noting that "i's also filled with deeply, deeply drawn characters ... Yet the dialogue is very sparse when you look at it proportionately to the running time of the film. I's such cinema. The shots are so painterly, yet ther's not an angle or single setup tha's pretentious."   Fellow Canadian filmmaker James Cameron also praised the movie, calling it "pure cinema" and stating that i's an improvement over the 1984 adaptation. Other reviews were more mixed in their judgement. In The Hollywood Reporter , Lovia Gyarkye praised the fil's technical aspects and performances, but found it failed to fully adapt the boo's nuance on themes such as imperialism.  Nicholas Barber wrote for the BBC that the film is "one of the most jaw-droppingly weird pieces of art-house psychedelia ever to come from a major studio", finding the fil's grand scale made up for its issues.  At the more negative end, Noah Berlatsky writing for CNN judged that the film had failed to "present an effective anti-colonial vision" by still being centred around Pau's destiny despite an increased voice of opposition from Chani.  Some commentators have criticized the film for failing to adequately deal with the original boo's Middle East and North Africa (MENA) influences or otherwise incorporate enough representation from the region.  Furvah Shah, writing for the UK edition of Cosmopolitan , said she "felt frustrated as a Muslim viewer", criticizing the film for a lack of MENA casting amongst the leads despite the use of the regio's culture and superficial use of Islam.  The New Arab's Hannah Flint also criticized the use of Arab and Islamic cultural items and lack of MENA casting, though did praise that of Swiss-Tunisian actress Souheila Yacoub as a "win for Arab representation".  Steven D. Greydanus, in U.S. Catholic , gives a contrasting view of the fil's religious inspirations, noting that the film draws from a number of Abrahamic religions for the purpose of critiquing faith itself, while also noting the "spiritualization of ecological concerns" through the Fremen.  Accolades [ edit ] Future [ edit ] Villeneuve has repeatedly expressed interest in making a third film based on Dune Messiah , the second novel in the series, adding that the possibility for the film depended on the success of Dune: Part Two .    Spaihts also reiterated in March 2022 that Villeneuve had plans for a third film as well as the television spin-off series Dune: Prophecy .  In August 2023, Villeneuve said the third film would serve as the conclusion of a trilogy.  Villeneuve began developing a script for the third film in 2023.  In February 2024, Villeneuve said the script was "almost finished" but also said he "[does not] want to rush it", citing Hollywoo's tendency of focusing on release dates over a fil's overall quality,  and adding, "I want to make sure that if we go back there a third time I want it to be good and I want it to be even better than Part Two ".  Villeneuve also considered waiting a few years for Chalamet to grow older, given that Dune Messiah is set 12 years after the events of the original book.  Ahead of Dune: Part Two' s release, Zimmer revealed he was already writing music for a third film after Villeneuve came in and "wordlessly" put a copy of Dune Messiah on his desk.  In April 2024, it was reported that Villeneuve and Legendary had officially begun development on the third film.   Villeneuve has said that Messiah would be his final Dune film.  Dune 3 is set to be released on December 18, 2026  See also [ edit ] List of films featuring eclipses List of films split into multiple parts

American entertainment company Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc. (commonly known as Warner Bros. ,  or abbreviated as WB , or WBEI ) is an American film and entertainment studio headquartered at the Warner Bros. Studios complex in Burbank, California , and a subsidiary of Warner Bros. Discovery (WBD). Founded in 1923 by four brothers, Harry , Albert , Sam , and Jack Warner , the company established itself as a leader in the American film industry before diversifying into animation , television , and video games , and is one of the "Big Five" major American film studios , as well as a member of the Motion Picture Association (MPA). The company is known for its film studio division, the Warner Bros. Motion Picture Group , which includes Warner Bros. Pictures , New Line Cinema , Warner Bros. Pictures Animation , Castle Rock Entertainment , DC Studios , and the Warner Bros. Television Group . Bugs Bunny , a character created for the Looney Tunes series, is the compan's official mascot. History Founding The compan's name originated from the founding Warner brothers (born Wonsal, Woron, and Wonskolaser    before Anglicization):   Harry , Albert , Sam , and Jack Warner. Harry, Albert and Sam emigrated as young children with their Polish-Jewish     mother to the United States from Krasnosielc , Poland (then part of Congress Poland within the Russian Empire ), in October 1889, a year after their father emigrated to the U.S. and settled in Baltimore , Maryland . As in many other immigrant families, the elder Wonsal children gradually acquired anglicized versions of their Yiddish -sounding names: Szmuel Wonsal became Samuel Warner (nicknamed "Sam"), Hirsz Wonsal became Harry Warner, and Aaron Wonsal (although born with a given name common in the Americas) became Albert Warner.  Jack, the youngest brother, was born in London, Ontario , during the famil's two-year residency in Canada. The Warner brothers: Albert, Jack, Harry and Sam The three elder brothers began in the movie theater business, having acquired a movie projector with which they showed films in the mining towns of Pennsylvania and Ohio . In the beginning,  Sam and Albert Warner invested $150 to present Life of an American Fireman and The Great Train Robbery . They opened their first theater, the Cascade , in New Castle, Pennsylvania , in 1903. When the original building was in danger of being demolished, the modern Warner Bros. called the current building owners and arranged to save it. The owners noted people across the country had asked them to protect it for its historical significance.  In 1904, the Warners founded the Pittsburgh -based Duquesne Amusement & Supply Company,   to distribute films. In 1912, Harry Warner hired an auditor named Paul Ashley Chase . By the time of World War I , they had begun producing films; in the early 1920s they acquired their first studio facilities on Sunset Boulevard in Hollywood. Sam and Jack produced the pictures, while Harry and Albert, along with their auditor and now-controller Chase, handled finance and distribution in New York City. During World War I their first nationally syndicated film, My Four Years in Germany , based on a popular book by former ambassador James W. Gerard , was released. On April 4, 1923, with help from money loaned to Harry by his banker Motley Flint,  they formally incorporated as Warner Bros. Pictures, Incorporated . (As late as the 1960s, Warner Bros. claimed 1905 as its founding date.)  Lobby card from Open Your Eyes (1919) Lobby card from The Beautiful and Damned (1922) The first important deal was the acquisition of the rights to Avery Hopwood's 1919 Broadway play, The Gold Diggers , from theatrical impresario David Belasco . However, Rin Tin Tin ,  a dog brought from France after World War I by an American soldier, established their reputation.  Rin Tin Ti's third film was the feature Where the North Begins , which was so successful that Jack signed the dog to star in more films for $1,000 per week.  Rin Tin Tin became the studi's top star.  Jack nicknamed him "The Mortgage Lifter"  and the success boosted Darryl F. Zanuck's career.  Zanuck eventually became a top producer  and between 1928 and 1933 served as Jac's right-hand man and executive producer , with responsibilities including day-to-day film production.  More success came after Ernst Lubitsch was hired as head director;  Harry Rapf left the studio to join Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer .  Lubitsc's film The Marriage Circle was the studi's most successful film of 1924, and was on The New York Times best list for that year.  The first logo of Warner Bros. Pictures (1923–1925) Despite the success of Rin Tin Tin and Lubitsch, Warne's remained a lesser studio.  Sam and Jack decided to offer Broadway actor John Barrymore the lead role in Beau Brummel .  The film was so successful that Harry signed Barrymore to a long-term contract;  like The Marriage Circle , Beau Brummel was named one of the ten best films of the year by the Times .  By the end of 1924, Warner Bros. was arguably Hollywoo's most successful independent studio,  where it competed with "The Big Three" Studios ( First National , Paramount Pictures , and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM)).  As a result, Harry Warner—while speaking at a convention of 1,500 independent exhibitors in Milwaukee, Wisconsin—was able to convince the filmmakers to spend $500,000 in newspaper advertising,  and Harry saw this as an opportunity to establish theaters in places such as New York City and Los Angeles.  As the studio prospered, it gained backing from Wall Street , and in 1924 Goldman Sachs arranged a major loan. With this new money, the Warners bought the pioneer Vitagraph Company which had a nationwide distribution system.  In 1925, Warner' also experimented in radio, establishing a successful radio station, KFWB , in Los Angeles.  1925–1935: Sound, color, style Warner Bros. was a pioneer of films with synchronized sound (then known as "talking pictures" or "talkies"). In 1925, at Sa's urging, Warne's agreed to add this feature to their productions.  By February 1926, the studio reported a net loss of $333,413.  Movie-goers awaiting Don Juan opening at Warner' Theatre After a long period denying Sa's request for sound, Harry agreed to change, as long as the studi's use of synchronized sound was for background music purposes only.  The Warners signed a contract with the sound engineer company Western Electric and established Vitaphone .  In 1926, Vitaphone began making films with music and effects tracks, most notably, in the feature Don Juan starring John Barrymore . The film was silent, but it featured a large number of Vitaphone shorts at the beginning. To hype Don Juan' s release, Harry acquired the large Piccadilly Theater in Manhattan , New York City , and renamed it Warner' Theatre.  Don Juan premiered at the Warner' Theatre in New York on August 6, 1926.  Throughout the early history of film distribution, theater owners hired orchestras to attend film showings, where they provided soundtracks . Through Vitaphone, Warner Bros. produced eight shorts (which were played at the beginning of every showing of Don Juan across the country) in 1926. Many film production companies questioned the necessity.  Don Juan did not recoup its production cost  and Lubitsch left for MGM.  By April 1927, the Big Five studios (First National, Paramount, MGM, Universal Pictures , and Producers Distributing) had ruined Warners,  and Western Electric renewed Warne's Vitaphone contract with terms that allowed other film companies to test sound.  As a result of their financial problems, Warner Bros. took the next step and released The Jazz Singer starring Al Jolson . This movie, which includes little sound dialogue, but did feature sound segments of Jolson singing, was a sensation. It signaled the beginning of the era of "talking pictures" and the twilight of the silent era. However, Sam died the night before the opening, preventing the brothers from attending the premiere. Jack became sole head of production.  Sa's death also had a great effect on Jac's emotional state,  as Sam was arguably Jac's inspiration and favorite brother.  In the years to come, Jack kept the studio under tight control.  Firing employees was common.  Among those whom Jack fired were Rin Tin Tin (in 1929) and Douglas Fairbanks Jr. (in 1933), the latter having served as First Nationa's top star since the brothers acquired the studio in 1928.  Thanks to the success of The Jazz Singer , the studio was cash-rich. Jolso's next film for the company, The Singing Fool was also a success.  With the success of these first talkies ( The Jazz Singer , Lights of New York , The Singing Fool and The Terror ), Warner Bros. became a top studio and the brothers were now able to move out from the Poverty Row section of Hollywood, and acquire a much larger studio lot in Burbank .  They expanded by acquiring the Stanley Corporation, a major theater chain.  This gave them a share in rival First National Pictures , of which Stanley owned one-third.  In a bidding war with William Fox , Warner Bros. bought more First National shares on September 13, 1928;  Jack also appointed Zanuck as the manager of First National Pictures.  Warner Bros.–First National Studios, Burbank, c. 1928 In 1928, Warner Bros. released Lights of New York , the first all-talking feature. Due to its success, the movie industry converted entirely to sound almost overnight. By the end of 1929, all the major studios were exclusively making sound films. In 1929, First National Pictures released their first film with Warner Bros., Noa's Ark .  Despite its expensive budget, Noa's Ark was profitable.  In 1929, Warner Bros. released On with the Show! , the first all-color all-talking feature. This was followed by Gold Diggers of Broadway which would play in theaters until 1939. The success of these pictures caused a color revolution. Warner Bros. color films from 1929 to 1931 included The Show of Shows (1929), Sally (1929), Bright Lights (1930), Golden Dawn (1930), Hold Everything (1930), Song of the Flame (1930), Song of the West (1930), The Life of the Party (1930), Sweet Kitty Bellairs (1930), Under a Texas Moon (1930), Bride of the Regiment (1930), Viennese Nights (1931), Woman Hungry (1931), Kiss Me Again (1931), 50 Million Frenchmen (1931) and Manhattan Parade (1932). In addition to these, scores of features were released with Technicolor sequences, as well as numerous Technicolor Specials short subjects . The majority of these color films were musicals. In 1929, Warner Bros. bought the St. Louis-based theater chain Skouras Brothers Enterprises . Following this takeover, Spyros Skouras , the driving force of the chain, became general manager of the Warner Brothers Theater Circuit in America. He worked successfully in that post for two years and turned its losses into profits. Harry produced an adaptation of a Cole Porter musical titled Fifty Million Frenchmen .  Through First National, the studi's profit increased substantially.  After the success of the studi's 1929 First National film Noa's Ark , Harry agreed to make Michael Curtiz a major director at the Burbank studio.  Mort Blumenstock, a First National screenwriter, became a top writer at the brother' New York headquarters.  In the third quarter, Warner Bros. gained complete control of First National, when Harry purchased the compan's remaining one-third share from Fox.  The Justice Department agreed to allow the purchase if First National was maintained as a separate company.  When the Great Depression hit, Warner asked for and got permission to merge the two studios. Soon afterward Warner Bros. moved to the First National lot in Burbank. Though the companies merged, the Justice Department required Warner to release a few films each year under the First National name until 1938. For thirty years, certain Warner productions were identified (mainly for tax purposes) as'A Warner Bros.–First National Picture' In the latter part of 1929, Jack Warner hired George Arliss to star in Disraeli ,  which was a success.  Arliss won an Academy Award for Best Actor and went on to star in nine more movies for the studio.  In 1930, Harry acquired more theaters in Atlantic City , despite the beginning of the Great Depression.  In July 1930, the studi's banker, Motley Flint, was murdered by a disgruntled investor in another company.  Harry acquired a string of music publishers (including M. Witmark & Sons , Remick Music Corp. , and T.B. Harms, Inc. ) to form Warner Bros. Music. In April 1930, Warner Bros. acquired Brunswick Records . Harry obtained radio companies, foreign sound patents and a lithograph company.  After establishing Warner Bros. Music, Harry appointed his son, Lewis, to manage the company.  By 1931, the studio began to feel the effects of the Great Depression, reportedly losing $8 million, and an additional $14 million the following year.  In 1931, Warner Bros. Music head Lewis Warner died from an infected wisdom tooth .  Around that time, Zanuck hired screenwriter Wilson Mizner ,  who had little respect for authority and found it difficult to work with Jack,  but became an asset.  As time passed, Warner became more tolerant of Mizner and helped invest in Mizne's Brown Derby restaurant.  Mizner died of a heart attack on April 3, 1933.  By 1932, musicals were declining in popularity, and the studio was forced to cut musical numbers from many productions and advertise them as straight comedies. The public had begun to associate musicals with color, and thus studios began to abandon its use. [ citation needed ] Warner Bros. had a contract with Technicolor to produce two more pictures in that process. As a result, the first horror films in color were produced and released by the studio: Doctor X (1932) and Mystery of the Wax Museum (1933). In the latter part of 1931, Harry Warner rented the Teddington Studios in London, England.  The studio focused on making " quota quickies " for the domestic British market  and Irving Asher was appointed as the studi's head producer.  In 1934, Harry officially purchased the Teddington Studios.  In February 1933, Warner Bros. produced 42nd Street , a very successful musical under the direction of Lloyd Bacon. Warner assigned Bacon to "more expensive productions including Footlight Parade , Wonder Bar , Broadway Gondolier " (which he also starred in), and Gold Diggers   that saved the company from bankruptcy.  In the wake of 42nd Street's success, the studio produced profitable musicals.  These starred Ruby Keeler and Dick Powell and were mostly directed by Busby Berkeley .  In 1935, the revival was affected by Berkele's arrest for killing three people while driving drunk.  By the end of the year, people again tired of Warner Bros. musicals,  and the studio — after the huge profits made by 1935 film Captain Blood — shifted its focus to Errol Flynn swashbucklers .  1930–1935: Pre-code realistic period With the collapse of the market for musicals, Warner Bros., under Zanuck, turned to more socially realistic storylines. Because of its many films about gangsters,  Warner Bros. soon became known as a "gangster studio".  The studi's first gangster film, Little Caesar , was a great box office success  and Edward G. Robinson starred in many of the subsequent Warner gangster films.  The studi's next effort, The Public Enemy ,  made James Cagney arguably the studi's new top star,  and Warner Bros. made more gangster films.  James Cagney and Joan Blondell in Footlight Parade (1933) "Movie for movie, Warners was the most reliable source of entertainment through the thirties and forties, even though it was clearly the most budget-conscious of them all." — Film historian Andrew Sarris in "You Ai't Heard Nothi' Yet.": The American Talking Film History & Memory, 1927–1949 .  Another gangster film the studio produced was the critically acclaimed I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang , based on a true story and starring Paul Muni ,  joining Cagney and Robinson as one of the studi's top gangster stars  after appearing in the successful film,  which convinced audiences to question the American legal system.  By January 1933, the fil's protagonist Robert Elliot Burns—still imprisoned in New Jersey—and other chain gang prisoners nationwide appealed and were released.  In January 1933, Georgia chain gang warden J. Harold Hardy—who was also made into a character in the film—sued the studio for displaying "vicious, untrue and false attacks" against him in the film.  After appearing in the Warne's film The Man Who Played God , Bette Davis became a top star.  In 1933, relief for the studio came after Franklin D. Roosevelt became president and began the New Deal .  This economic rebound allowed Warner Bros. to again become profitable.  The same year, Zanuck quit. Harry Warne's relationship with Zanuck had become strained after Harry strongly opposed allowing Zanuc's film Baby Face to step outside Hays Code boundaries.  The studio reduced his salary as a result of losses from the Great Depression,  and Harry refused to restore it as the company recovered.  Zanuck  established his own company. Harry thereafter raised salaries for studio employees.  In 1933, Warner was able to link up with newspaper tycoon William Randolph Hearst's Cosmopolitan Films.  Hearst had previously worked with MGM,  but ended the association after a dispute with head producer Irving Thalberg over the treatment of Hears's longstanding mistress, actress Marion Davies , who was struggling for box office success.  Through his partnership with Hearst, Warner signed Davies to a studio contract.  Hears's company and Davie' films, however, did not increase the studi's profits.  In 1934, the studio lost over $2.5 million,  of which $500,000 was the result of a 1934 fire at the Burbank studio, destroying 20 year' worth of early Vitagraph, Warner Bros. and First National films.  The following year, Hears's film adaption of William Shakespeare's A Midsummer Nigh's Dream (1935) failed at the box office and the studi's net loss increased.  During this time, Harry and six other movie studio figures were indicted for conspiracy to violate the Sherman Antitrust Act ,  through an attempt to gain a monopoly over St Louis movie theaters.  In 1935, Harry was put on trial;  after a mistrial, Harry sold the compan's movie theaters and the case was never reopened.  1935 also saw the studio make a net profit of $674,158.00.  The studio as depicted in the trailer for The Petrified Forest (1936) By 1936, contracts of musical and silent stars were not renewed, instead being replaced by tough-talking, working-class types who better fit these pictures. As a result, Dorothy Mackaill , Dolores del Río , Bebe Daniels , Frank Fay , Winnie Lightner , Bernice Claire , Alexander Gray, Alice White , and Jack Mulhall that had characterized the urban, modern, and sophisticated attitude of the 1920s gave way to James Cagney , Joan Blondell , Edward G. Robinson , Warren William and Barbara Stanwyck , who would be more acceptable to the common man. The studio was one of the most prolific producers of Pre-Code pictures and had a lot of trouble with the censors once they started clamping down on what they considered indecency (around 1934).  As a result, Warner Bros. turned to historical pictures from around 1935 to avoid confrontations with the Breen office. In 1936, following the success of The Petrified Forest , Jack signed Humphrey Bogart to a studio contract.  Warner, however, did not think Bogart was star material,  and cast Bogart in infrequent roles as a villain opposite either James Cagney or Edward Robinson over the next five years.  After Hal B. Wallis succeeded Zanuck in 1933,  and the Hays Code began to be enforced in 1935, the studio was forced to abandon this realistic approach in order to produce more moralistic, idealized pictures. The studi's historical dramas, melodramas (or "wome's pictures"), swashbucklers, and adaptations of best-sellers, with stars like Bette Davis , Olivia de Havilland , Paul Muni , and Errol Flynn , avoided the censors. In 1936, Bette Davis, by now arguably the studi's top star,  was unhappy with her roles. She traveled to England and tried to break her contract.  Davis lost the lawsuit and returned to America.  Although many of the studi's employees had problems with Jack Warner, they considered Albert and Harry fair.  Code era In the 1930s many actors and actresses who had characterized the realistic pre-Code era, but who were not suited to the new trend into moral and idealized pictures, disappeared. Warner Bros. remained a top studio in Hollywood , but this changed after 1935 as other studios, notably MGM, quickly overshadowed the prestige and glamor that previously characterized Warner Bros. However, in the late 1930s, Bette Davis became the studi's top draw and was even dubbed as "The Fifth Warner Brother". [ citation needed ] Humphrey Bogart in The Petrified Forest (1936) In 1935, Cagney sued Jack Warner for breach of contract.  Cagney claimed Warner had forced him to star in more films than his contract required.  Cagney eventually dropped his lawsuit after a cash settlement.  Nevertheless, Cagney left the studio to establish an independent film company with his brother Bill.  The Cagneys released their films though Grand National Films ; however, they were not able to get good financing  and ran out of money after their third film.  Cagney then agreed to return to Warner Bros., after Jack agreed to a contract guaranteeing Cagney would be treated to his own terms.  After the success of Yankee Doodle Dandy at the box office, Cagney again questioned if the studio would meet his salary demand  and again quit to form his own film production and distribution company with Bill.  Another employee with whom Warner had troubles was studio producer Bryan Foy .  In 1936, Wallis hired Foy as a producer for the studi's low budget B movies leading to his nickname "the keeper of the 's".  Foy was able to garnish arguably more profits than any other B-film producer at the time.  During Fo's time at the studio, however, Warner fired him seven different times.  During 1936, The Story of Louis Pasteur proved a box office success  and star Paul Muni won the Oscar for Best Actor in March 1937.  The studi's 1937 film The Life of Emile Zola gave the studio the first of its seven Best Picture Oscars .  In 1937, the studio hired Midwestern radio announcer Ronald Reagan , who would eventually become the President of the United States . Although Reagan was initially a B-film actor, Warner Bros. was impressed by his performance in the final scene of Knute Rockne, All American , and agreed to pair him with Flynn in Santa Fe Trail (1940). Reagan then returned to B-films.  After his performance in the studi's 1942 Kings Row , Warner decided to make Reagan a top star and signed him to a new contract, tripling his salary.  In 1936, Harr's daughter Doris read a copy of Margaret Mitchel's Gone with the Wind and was interested in making a film adaptation.  Doris offered Mitchell $50,000 for screen rights. Jack vetoed the deal, realizing it would be an expensive production.  Major Paramount star George Raft also eventually proved to be a problem for Jack.  Warner had signed him in 1939, finally bringing the third top 1930s gangster actor into the Warners fold, knowing that he could carry any gangster picture when either Robinson or Cagney were on suspension.  Raft had difficulty working with Bogart and refused to co-star with him.  Eventually, Warner agreed to release Raft from his contract in 1943.  After Raft had turned the role down, the studio gave Bogart the role of "Mad Dog" Roy Earle in the 1941 film High Sierra ,  which helped establish him as a top star.  Following High Sierra and after Raft had once again turned the part down, Bogart was given the leading role in John Huston's successful 1941 remake of the studi's 1931 pre-Code film, The Maltese Falcon ,  based upon the Dashiell Hammett novel. Warne's cartoons Main articles: Warner Bros. Cartoons and Warner Bros. Animation Warne's cartoon unit had its roots in the independent Harman and Ising studio. From 1930 to 1933, Walt Disney Studios alumni Hugh Harman and Rudolf Ising produced musical cartoons for Leon Schlesinger , who sold them to Warner. Harman and Ising introduced their character Bosko in the first Looney Tunes cartoon, Sinki' in the Bathtub , and created a sister series, Merrie Melodies , in 1931.  Harman and Ising broke away from Schlesinger in 1933 due to a contractual dispute, taking Bosko with them to MGM. As a result, Schlesinger started his own studio, Leon Schlesinger Productions , which continued with Merrie Melodies while starting production on Looney Tunes starring Buddy , a Bosko clone. By the end of World War II, a new Schlesinger production team, including directors Friz Freleng (started in 1934), Tex Avery (started in 1935), Frank Tashlin (started in 1936), Bob Clampett (started in 1937), Chuck Jones (started in 1938), and Robert McKimson (started in 1946), was formed. Schlesinge's staff developed a fast-paced, irreverent style that made their cartoons globally popular. In 1935, Avery directed Porky Pig cartoons that established the character as the studi's first animated star.  In addition to Porky, Daffy Duck (who debuted in 193's Pork's Duck Hunt ), Elmer Fudd ( Elme's Candid Camera , 1940), Bugs Bunny ( A Wild Hare , 1940), and Tweety ( A Tale of Two Kitties , 1942) would achieve star power.  By 1942, the Schlesinger studio had surpassed Walt Disney Studios as the most successful producer of animated shorts.  Warner Bros. bought Schlesinge's cartoon unit in 1944 and renamed it Warner Bros. Cartoons . However, senior management treated the unit with indifference, beginning with the installation as senior producer of Edward Selzer , whom the creative staff considered an interfering incompetent. Jack Warner had little regard for the compan's short film product and reputedly was so ignorant about the studi's animation division that he was mistakenly convinced that the unit produced cartoons of Mickey Mouse , the flagship character of Walt Disney Productions .  He sold off the uni's pre-August 1948 library for $3,000 each, which proved a shortsighted transaction in light of its eventual value.  Warner Bros. Cartoons continued, with intermittent interruptions, until 1969 when it was dissolved as the parent company ceased its production of film shorts entirely. Characters such as Bugs Bunny, Daffy Duck, Tweety , Sylvester , and Porky Pig became central to the compan's image in subsequent decades. Bugs in particular remains a mascot to Warner Bros., its various divisions, and Six Flags (which Time Warner once owned). The success of the compilation film The Bugs Bunny/Road Runner Movie in 1979, featuring the archived film of these characters, prompted Warner Bros. to organize Warner Bros. Animation as a new production division to restart production of original material. World War II According to Warne's autobiography, prior to US entry in World War II , Philip Kauffman, Warner Bros. German sales head, was murdered by the Nazis in Berlin in 1936.    Harry produced the successful anti-German film The Life of Emile Zola (1937).  After that, Harry supervised the production of more anti-German films, including Confessions of a Nazi Spy (1939),  The Sea Hawk (1940), which made King Philip II an equivalent of Hitler ,  Sergeant York ,  and Yo're In The Army Now (1941).  Harry then decided to focus on producing war films.  Warner' cut its film production in half during the war, eliminating its B Pictures unit in 1941. Bryan Foy joined Twentieth Century Fox.  Bette Davis in Now, Voyager (1942) During the war era, the studio made Casablanca ; Now, Voyager ; Yankee Doodle Dandy (all 1942); This Is the Army , and Mission to Moscow (both 1943).  The last of these films became controversial a few years afterwards. At the premieres of Yankee Doodle Dandy (in Los Angeles, New York, and London), audiences purchased $15.6 million in war bonds for the governments of England and the United States. By the middle of 1943, however, audiences had tired of war films, but Warner continued to produce them, losing money. In honor of the studi's contributions to the cause, the Navy named a Liberty ship after the brother' father, Benjamin Warner. Harry christened the ship. By the time the war ended, $20 million in war bonds were purchased through the studio, the Red Cross collected 5,200 pints of blood plasma from studio employees  and 763 of the studi's employees served in the armed forces, including Harry Warne's son-in-law Milton Sperling and Jac's son Jack Warner Jr.  Following a dispute over ownership of Casablanca's Oscar for Best Picture, Wallis resigned. After Casablanca made Bogart a top star, Bogar's relationship with Jack deteriorated.  In 1943, Olivia de Havilland (whom Warner frequently loaned to other studios) sued Warner for breach of contract.  De Havilland had refused to portray famed abolitionist Elizabeth Blackwell in an upcoming film for Columbia Pictures .  Warner responded by sending 150 telegrams to different film production companies, warning them not to hire her for any role.  Afterwards, de Havilland discovered employment contracts in California could only last seven years ; de Havilland had been under contract with the studio since 1935.  The court ruled in de Havillan's favor and she left the studio in favor of RKO Radio Pictures, and, eventually, Paramount.  Through de Havillan's victory, many of the studi's longtime actors were now freed from their contracts, and Harry decided to terminate the studi's suspension policy.   The same year, Jack signed newly released MGM actress Joan Crawford , a former top star who found her career fading.  Crawfor's first role with the studio was 194's Hollywood Canteen .  Her first starring role at the studio, in the title role as Mildred Pierce (1945), revived her career  and earned her an Oscar for Best Actress.  After World War II: changing hands In the post-war years, Warner Bros. prospered greatly and continued to create new stars, including Lauren Bacall and Doris Day .  By 1946, company payroll reached $600,000 a week  and net profit topped $19.4 million (equivalent to $303.1 million in 2023). Jack Warner continued to refuse to meet Screen Actors Guild salary demands.  In September 1946, employees engaged in a month-long strike.  In retaliation, Warner—during his 1947 testimony before Congress about Mission to Moscow —accused multiple employees of ties to Communists.  By the end of 1947, the studio reached a record net profit of $22 million (equivalent to $300 million in 2023).  Warner acquired Pathé News from RKO in 1947. On January 5, 1948, Warner offered the first color newsreel , covering the Tournament of Roses Parade and the Rose Bowl Game . In 1948, Bette Davis, still their top actress and now hostile to Jack, was a big problem for Harry after she and others left the studio after completing the film Beyond the Forest .  Warner was a party to the United States v. Paramount Pictures, Inc. antitrust case of the 1940s. This action, brought by the Justice Department and the Federal Trade Commission , claimed the five integrated studio-theater chain combinations restrained competition. The Supreme Court heard the case in 1948, and ruled for the government. As a result, Warner and four other major studios were forced to separate production from the exhibition. In 1949, the studi's net profit was only $10 million (equivalent to $128.06 million in 2023).  Warner Bros. had two semi-independent production companies that released films through the studio. [ citation needed ] One of these was Sperling's United States Pictures .  Vivien Leigh as Blanche DuBois in A Streetcar Named Desire (1951) In the early 1950s, the threat of television emerged. In 1953, Jack decided to copy  United Artists successful 3D film Bwana Devil , releasing his own 3D films beginning with House of Wax .  However, 3D films soon lost their appeal among moviegoers.  3D almost caused the demise of the Warner Bros. cartoon studio. Having completed a 3D Bugs Bunny cartoon, Lumber Jack-Rabbit , Jack Warner ordered the animation unit to be closed, erroneously believing that all cartoons hence would be produced in the 3D process. Several months later, Warner relented and reopened the cartoon studio. Warner Bros. had enough of a backlog of cartoons and a healthy reissue program so that there was no noticeable interruption in the release schedule. In 1952, Warner Bros. made their first film ( Carson City ) in "Warnercolor", the studi's name for Eastmancolor . After the downfall of 3D films, Harry Warner decided to use CinemaScope in future Warner Bros. films.  One of the studi's first CinemaScope films, The High and the Mighty (owned by John Wayne's company, Batjac Productions ), enabled the studio to show a profit.  Early in 1953, Warne's theater holdings were spun off as Stanley Warner Theaters; Stanley Warne's non-theater holdings were sold to Simon Fabian Enterprises,  and its theaters merged with RKO Theatres to become RKO-Stanley Warner Theatres.  By 1956, the studio was losing money,  declining from 195's net profit of $2.9 million (equivalent to $33 million in 2023)  and the next two years of between $2 and $4 million.  On February 13, 1956, Jack Warner sold the rights to all of the studi's pre-1950 films to Associated Artists Productions (which merged with United Artists Television in 1958, and was subsequently acquired by Turner Broadcasting System in early 1986 as part of a failed takeover of MGM/UA by Ted Turner ).    In May 1956, the brothers announced they were putting Warner Bros. on the market.  Jack secretly organized a syndicate – headed by Boston banker Serge Semenenko  – to purchase 90% of the stock.  After the three brothers sold, Jack – through his under-the-table deal – joined Semenenk's syndicate  and bought back all his stock.  Shortly after the deal was completed in July,  Jack – now the compan's largest stockholder – appointed himself its new president.   Shortly after the deal closed, Jack announced the company and its subsidiaries would be "directed more vigorously to the acquisition of the most important story properties, talents, and to the production of the finest motion pictures possible."  Warner Bros. Television and Warner Bros. Records By 1949, with the success of television threatening the film industry more and more, Harry Warner decided to emphasize television production.  However, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) would not permit it.  After an unsuccessful attempt to convince other movie studio bosses to switch, Harry abandoned his television efforts.  Jack had problems with Milton Berle's unsuccessful film Always Leave Them Laughing during the peak of Berl's television popularity. Warner felt that Berle was not strong enough to carry a film and that people would not pay to see the man they could see on television for free. However, Jack was pressured into using Berle, who replaced Danny Kaye .  Berl's outrageous behavior on the set and the fil's massive failure led to Jack banning television sets from film sets and mentions of television itself from film scripts. In his 1991 autobiography, Do't Shoot, I's Only Me , Bob Hope remarked that "when Warners filmed a living room after that, the whole family would just gather around a fireplace".  James Garner and Jack Kelly in Maverick (1957) On March 21, 1955, the studio was finally able to engage in television through the successful Warner Bros. Television unit run by William T. Orr , Jack Warne's son-in-law. Warner Bros. Television provided ABC with a weekly show, Warner Bros. Presents . The show featured rotating shows based on three film successes, Kings Row , Casablanca and Cheyenne , followed by a promotion for a new film.   It was not a success.  The studi's next effort was to make a weekly series out of Cheyenne .  Cheyenne was televisio's first hour-long Western . Two episodes were placed together for feature film release outside the United States. In the tradition of its B movies, the studio followed up with a series of rapidly produced popular Westerns , such as writer/producer Roy Huggins' critically lauded Maverick as well as Sugarfoot , Bronco , Lawman , The Alaskans and Colt .45 .  The success of these series helped to make up for losses in the film business.  As a result, Jack Warner decided to emphasize television production.  Warners produced a series of popular private detective shows beginning with 77 Sunset Strip (1958–1964) followed by Hawaiian Eye (1959–1963), Bourbon Street Beat (1960) and Surfside 6 (1960–1962). Within a few years, the studio provoked hostility among its TV stars such as Clint Walker and James Garner , who sued over a contract dispute and won.  Edd Byrnes was not so lucky and bought himself out of his contract. Jack was angered by their perceived ingratitude. Television actors evidently showed more independence than film actors, deepening his contempt for the new medium.  Many of Warne's television stars appeared in the casts of Warne's cinema releases. In 1963, a court decision forced Warner Bros. to end contracts with their television stars and to cease engaging them for specific series or film roles. That year, Jack Webb , best known for originating the role of Sgt. Joe Friday in the Dragnet franchise , became the head of the studi's TV division.  Dean Martin and Frank Sinatra appear in a number of Warner Bros. films produced in the early 1960s. Both singers also recorded for Reprise Records , which the studio purchased in 1963. On March 19, 1958, the studio launched Warner Bros. Records , with its inaugural office based above the studi's machine shop on 3701 Warner Boulevard in Burbank.  Initially, the label released recordings made by their television stars—whether they could sing or not—and records based on television soundtracks. Warner Bros. was already the owner of extensive music-publishing holdings, whose tunes had appeared in countless cartoons (arranged by Carl Stalling ) and television shows (arranged by Max Steiner ).  In 2004, Time Warner sold the Warner Music Group , along with Warner Bros. Records, to a private equity group led by Edgar Bronfman Jr.  In 2019, the since-separated Warner Bros. record division was rechristened Warner Records, as WMG held a short-term license to use the Warner Bros. name and trademarks; as such, the label currently reissues the pre-2019 Warner Bros. back catalog. In 1963, Warner agreed to a "rescue takeover" of Frank Sinatra's Reprise Records .  The deal gave Sinatra US$1.5 million and part ownership of Warner Bros. Records, making Reprise a sub-label.  Most significantly the deal brought Reprise manager Morris "Mo" Ostin into the company. In 1964, upon seeing the profits record companies made from Warner film music, Warner decided to claim ownership of the studi's film soundtracks.  In its first eighteen months, Warner Bros. Records lost around $2 million.  New owners Warner Bros. rebounded in the late 1950s, specializing in adaptations of popular plays like The Bad Seed (1956), No Time for Sergeants (1958), and Gypsy (1962). While he slowly recovered from a car crash that occurred while vacationing in France in 1958, Jack returned to the studio and made sure his name was featured in studio press releases. From 1961 to 1963, the studi's annual net profit was a little over $7 million.  Warner paid an unprecedented $5.5 million for the film rights to the Broadway musical My Fair Lady in February 1962. The previous owner, CBS Chairman William S. Paley , set terms including half the distributo's gross profits "plus ownership of the negative at the end of the contract."  In 1963, the studi's net profit dropped to $3.7 million.  By the mid-1960s, motion picture production was in decline, as the industry was in the midst of a painful transition from the Golden Age of Hollywood to the era now known as New Hollywood . Few studio films were made in favor of co-productions (for which Warner provided facilities, money and distribution), and pickups of independent pictures. With the success of the studi's 1964 film of Broadway play My Fair Lady ,  as well as its soundtrack,  Warner Bros. Records became a profitable subsidiary. The 1966 film Wh's Afraid Of Virginia Woolf? was a huge success.  Following Jack Warne's 1966 year end sale to Seven Arts Productions , the company was known as Warner Bros.-Seven Arts from 1967 until 1969. The compan's logo was used until 1972. In November 1966, Jack gave in to advancing age and changing times,  selling control of the studio and music business to Seven Arts Productions , run by Canadian investors Eliot and Kenneth Hyman , for $32 million.  The company, including the studio, was renamed Warner Bros.-Seven Arts . Warner remained president until the summer of 1967, when Camelot failed at the box office and Warner gave up his position to his longtime publicity director, Ben Kalmenson;  Warner remained on board as an independent producer and vice-president.  With the 1967 success of Bonnie and Clyde , Warner Bros. was again profitable.  Two years later the Hymans were tired and fed-up with Jack Warner and his actions.  They accepted a cash-and-stock offer from Kinney National Company for more than $64 million.  In 1967, Kinney had previously acquired DC Comics (then officially known as National Periodical Publications), as well as a Hollywood talent agency, Ashley-Famous ,  whose founder Ted Ashley led Kinney head Steve Ross to purchase Warner Bros. Ashley-Famous was soon spun off due to antitrust laws prohibiting the simultaneous ownership of a film studio and a talent agency. Ashley became the studio head and changed the name to Warner Bros. Inc. once again.  Jack Warner was outraged by the Hyman' sale, and decided to move into independent production (most successfully with 1776 at Columbia). He retired in 1973 and died from serious health complications of heart inflammation in September 1978. The logo, designed by Saul Bass , was used from 1972 until 1984. It is currently used by the separately spun-off Warner Music Group . Although movie audiences had shrunk, Warne's new management believed in the drawing power of stars, signing co-production deals with several of the biggest names of the day, including Paul Newman , Robert Redford , Barbra Streisand , and Clint Eastwood , carrying the studio successfully through the 1970s and 1980s. Its hits in the early 1970s included those starring the aforementioned actors, along with comedian Mel Brooks' Blazing Saddles , Stanley Kubrick's A Clockwork Orange , The Exorcist , John Boorman's Deliverance , and the Martin Scorsese productions Mean Streets and Alice Does't Live Here Anymore . Warner Bros. also made major profits on films and television shows built around the characters of Superman , Batman , Wonder Woman and The Flash owned by Warner Bros. subsidiary DC Comics . The 1970s also saw Warner Bros. Records become one of the major record labels worldwide, and that company gained sister labels in Elektra Records and Atlantic Records . In 1971, Filmation and Warner Bros. entered into an agreement to produce and distribute cartoons for film and television, with its television subsidiary handling worldwide television rights.  In late 1973, Warner Bros. announced that it had partnered with 20th Century Fox to co-produce a single film: producer Irwin Allen's The Towering Inferno .  Both studios found themselves owning the rights to books about burning skyscrapers: Warner was attempting to adapt Thomas N. Scortia and Frank M. Robinson's The Glass Inferno and Fox was preparing an adaptation of Richard Martin Stern's The Tower . Allen insisted on a meeting with the heads of both studios and announced that as Fox was already in the lead with their property it would be preferable to lump the two together as a single film, with Fox owning domestic rights and Warner Bros. handling the fil's foreign distribution. The resulting partnership resulted in the second-highest-grossing film of 1974, turning profits for both studios, and influencing future co-productions between major studios. Although Allen would make further films for Warner Bros., he would not repeat the success he had with The Towering Inferno . Abandoning parking lots and funeral homes, the refocused Kinney renamed itself in honor of its best-known holding, Warner Communications . Throughout the 1970s and 1980s Warner Communications branched out into other business, such as video game company Atari, Inc. in 1976, and later the Six Flags theme parks. In 1972, in a cost-cutting move, Warner and Columbia formed a third company called The Burbank Studios (TBS).  They would share the Warner lot in Burbank.  Both studios technically became production entities, giving TBS day-to-day responsibility for studio grounds and upkeep.  The Columbia Ranch (about a mile north of Warne's lot) was part of the deal.  The Warner–Columbia relationship was acrimonious, but the reluctance of both studios to approve or spend money on capital upgrades that might only help the other did have the unintended consequence of preserving the Warner lo's primary function as a filmmaking facility while it produced relatively little during the 1970s and 1980s.  However, a famous film that had been filmed at The Burbank Studios at that time was Blade Runner (1982) by director Ridley Scott .  All in all, most films produced after 1968 were filmed on location after the failure of Camelot was partially attributed to the fact it was set in England but obviously filmed in Burbank.  With control over its own lot tied up in TBS, Warner ultimately retained a significant portion of its backlot ,  while Fox sold its backlot to create Century City , Universal turned part of its backlot into a theme park and shopping center , and Disney replaced its backlot with office buildings and exiled its animation department to an industrial park in Glendale. In 1989, a solution to the situation became evident when Warner Bros. acquired Lorimar-Telepictures and gained control of the former MGM studio lot in Culver City , and that same year, Sony bought Columbia Pictures.  Sony was flush with cash and Warner Bros. now had two studio lots.  In 1990, TBS ended when Sony bought the MGM lot from Warner and moved Columbia to Culver City.  However, Warner kept the Columbia Ranch, now known as the Warner Bros. Ranch.  Robert A. Daly joined Warner Bros. on December 1, 1980, taking over from Ted Ashley. His titles were chairman of the board and Co-Chief Executive Officer. One year later, he was named chairman of the board and chief executive officer and appointed Terry Semel President and Chief Operating Officer. Time Warner subsidiary A panoramic view over toda's studio premises Warner Communications merged in 1989 with white-shoe publishing company Time Inc. Time claimed a higher level of prestige, while Warner Bros. provided the profits. The Time-Warner merger was almost derailed when Paramount Communications (formerly Gulf+Western , later sold to the first incarnation of Viacom ), launched a $12.2 billion hostile takeover bid for Time Inc., forcing Time to acquire Warner with a $14.9 billion cash/stock offer. Paramount responded with a lawsuit filed in Delaware court to break up the merger. Paramount lost and the merger proceeded. In 1992, Warner Bros. Family Entertainment was established to produce various family-oriented films, plus animated films. The Family Entertainment label was dormant in 2009. In 1994, Jon Peters, whose Peters Entertainment company had a non-exclusive deal at Sony Pictures , received another non-exclusive, financing deal at the studio, citing that then president Terry Samel and producer Jon Peters were friends.  The former Warner Bros. shield logo, which was used from 1993 to 2019, and extensively used in films and on its TV shows until 2022. Currently used as the on-screen logo for Warner Bros. Home Entertainment . In 1995, Warner Bros. and television station owner Tribune Company of Chicago launched The WB Television Network, seeking a large share of the niche market of teenage viewers. The W's early programming included an abundance of teenage fare, such as Buffy the Vampire Slayer , Smallville , Dawso's Creek and One Tree Hill . Two dramas produced by Spelling Television , 7th Heaven and Charmed , helped bring The WB into the spotlight. Charmed lasted eight seasons, becoming the longest-running drama with female leads. 7th Heaven ran for eleven seasons and was the longest-running family drama and longest-running show for the network. In 2006, Warner Bros. and CBS Corporation decided to close The WB and CB's UPN and jointly launch The CW Television Network. In 1996, Turner Pictures was folded into Warner Bros. via the Turner -Time Warner Entertainment merger. This brought projects such as City of Angels and Yo've Got Mail into the studio.  Later that year, Warner Bros. partnered with PolyGram Filmed Entertainment to distribute various movies produced by Castle Rock Entertainment , also brought into Warner Bros. by the Turner deal.  Also that same year, Bruce Berman left Warner Bros. to begin Plan B Entertainment, then he subsequently headed Village Roadshow Pictures with a deal at the studio.  In 1998, Time Warner Entertainment sold Six Flags to Premier Parks.  The takeover of Time Warner Entertainment in 2001 by then-high-flying America Online (AOL) did not prove a good match, and following the collapse in "dot-com" stocks, the AOL element was banished from the corporate name. In 1998, Warner Bros. celebrated its 75th anniversary. In 1999, Terry Semel and Robert Daly resigned as studio heads after a career with 13 Oscar-nominated films. Daly and Semel were said to have popularized the modern model of partner financing and profit sharing for film production. In mid-1999, Alan F. Horn and Barry Meyer replaced Daly and Semel as new studio heads, in which the studio had continued success in movies, television shows, cartoons, that the previous studio heads had for the studio. In late 2003, Time Warner reorganized Warner Bros' assets under Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc. , in an effort to distinguish the film studio from its then-sister record label (which since became Warner Records in May 2019) and Warner Music Group. In the late 1990s, Warner Bros. obtained rights to the Harry Potter novels and released feature film adaptations of the first in 2001. Subsequently, they released the second film in 2002, the third in June 2004, the fourth in November 2005, the fifth in July 2007, and the sixth in July 2009.  The seventh (and at that time, final) book was released as two movies; Deathly Hallows — Part 1 in November 2010 and Deathly Hallows — Part 2 in July 2011. From 2006, Warner Bros. operated a joint venture with China Film Group Corporation and HG to form Warner China Film HG to produce films in Hong Kong and China, including Connected , a remake of the 2004 thriller film Cellular . Warner Bros. played a large part in the discontinuation of the HD DVD format. On January 4, 2008, Warner Bros. announced that they would drop support of HD DVD in favor of Blu-ray Disc.  HD DVDs continued to be released through May 2008, but only following Blu-ray and DVD releases. Warner Bros' Harry Potter film series was the worldwide highest-grossing film series of all time without adjusting for inflation. Its Batman film series was one of only two series to have two entries earn more than $1 billion worldwide. Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 was Warner Bros' highest-grossing movie ever (surpassing The Dark Knight ).  However, the Harry Potter movies have produced a net loss due to Hollywood accounting .  IMAX Corp. signed with Warner Bros. Pictures in April 2010 to release as many as 20 giant-format films through 2013.  On October 21, 2014, Warner Bros. created a short form digital unit, Blue Ribbon Content, under Warner Bros. Animation and Warner Digital Series president Sam Register .  Warner Bros. Digital Networks announced its acquisition of online video company Machinima, Inc. on November 17, 2016.  As of 2015, Warner Bros. is one of only three studios to have released a pair of billion-dollar films in the same year (along with Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures and Universal Studios ); the distinction was achieved in 2012 with The Dark Knight Rises and The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey .    As of 2016, it is the only studio to cross $1 billion at the domestic box office every year since 2000.  AT&T subsidiary In June 2018, Warner Bros. parent company Time Warner was acquired by U.S. telecom company AT&T , and renamed WarnerMedia, the former Time Inc. properties having been sold off to new owners.  On October 16, 2018, WarnerMedia shut down DramaFever , affecting 20 percent of Warner Bros' digital networks staff.  On March 4, 2019, WarnerMedia announced a planned reorganization that would dissolve Turner Broadcasting System by moving Cartoon Network , Adult Swim , Boomerang , their respective production studios ( Cartoon Network Studios and Williams Street ), as well as Turner Classic Movies and Otter Media , directly under Warner Bros. (Turne's remaining television services would be divided into WarnerMedia Entertainment and WarnerMedia News & Sports respectively). Aside from Otter Media, these assets operate under a newly formed Global Kids & Young Adults division,  renamed on April 7, 2020, to Warner Bros. Global Kids, Young Adults and Classics .  On May 31, 2019, Otter Media was transferred from Warner Bros. to WarnerMedia Entertainment to oversee the development of HBO Max , a new streaming service that would feature content from HBO and WarnerMedia brands.  Tom Ascheim resigned as president of cable network Freeform to become the president of the Global Kids, Young Adults, and Classics division on July 1, 2020.  The 2019 Warner Bros. shield logo by Pentagram , which is used since 2019, and concurrently used with Chermayeff & Geismar & Haviv's 2023 Warner Bros. logo since 2023. These are the two versions of Pentagra's 2019 Warner Bros. shield logo, which are used since 2019. One is the regular logo on the left, and the other is the "dimensional" version on the right.  On November 13, 2019, Warner Bros. unveiled an updated iteration of its shield logo by Pentagram in anticipation of the compan's upcoming centennial, which features a streamlined appearance designed to make it better-suited for multi-platform usage and iterations. The company also commissioned a new corporate typeface that is modeled upon the "WB" lettering.   Warner Bros. and HBO Max announced the Warner Max film label on February 5, 2020, which was to produce eight-to-ten mid-budget movies per year for the streaming service starting in 2020.  However, the label was ultimately discontinued in October 2020 as part of a consolidation of the Warner Bros. Pictures group.    In February 2022, Village Roadshow Pictures , a co-financier of The Matrix Resurrections , began a lawsuit against Warner Bros. over the hybrid release of the sci-fi sequel. Like all of Warner Bros' 2021 films, the fourth Matrix film was given a simultaneous release on both HBO Max and in theaters due to the COVID-19 pandemic . According to a complaint filed by Village Roadshow, the decision ruined any December box office hopes.  In May of that same year, Village Roadshow agreed to arbitration with Warner Bros. over the release of The Matrix Resurrections .  Warner Bros. Discovery On April 8, 2022, AT&T divested WarnerMedia to its shareholders, and in turn merged with Discovery Inc. to form Warner Bros. Discovery . The new company is led by Discover's CEO David Zaslav .     In March 2022, Warner Bros. soft launched a campaign for its centennial in 2023, with the tagline "100 Years of Storytelling". In December 2022, the centennial campaign was launched with the new tagline "Celebrating Every Story", which will include commemorative initiatives across all Warner Bros. divisions and properties.   The campaign utilizes a commemorative logo featuring an updated shield by Chermayeff & Geismar & Haviv (first introduced in the Warner Bros. Discovery logo), which was revised with a softer appearance, thicker outlines, and a return to using blue and gold as its corporate colors (if not rendered in different colors or textures to suit a specific property). The updated shield is used as a secondary logo, and is used concurrently with the 2019 logo (which is the main and primary logo) since May 2023.   As part of the 100th anniversary campaign, the studio will release new short features for the Max streaming service that recreates Warner Bros. classics with a focus on diversity.  In November 2022, James Gunn and Peter Safran became the co-chairpersons and CEOs of DC Films , which was renamed to "DC Studios". The studio also become an independent division of Warner Bros.   Company units Warner Bros. Entertainment operates three primary business segments they call "divisions": Motion Picture Group , Television , and other entertainment assets (which includes Digital Networks, Technology, Live Theatre , and Studio Facilities). Motion Pictures includes the compan's primary business units, such as Warner Bros. Pictures , New Line Cinema , DC Studios and Castle Rock Entertainment . Executive management Chairman of the board Robert A. Daly (1980–1999) Barry Meyer (1999–2013) Kevin Tsujihara (2013–2019) Ann Sarnoff (2019–2022) Vice chairman Edward A. Romano (1994–2016) Presidents Terry Semel (1994–1999) Chief executive officers Robert A. Daly (1980–1999) Barry Meyer (1999–2013) Kevin Tsujihara (2013–2019) Ann Sarnoff (2019–2022) Chief operating officers Terry Semel (1982–1994) Barry Meyer (1994–1999) International distribution arrangements From 1971 until the end of 1987, Warne's international distribution operations were a joint venture with Columbia Pictures . In some countries, this joint venture distributed films from other companies (such as EMI Films and Cannon Films in the UK). Warner ended the venture in 1988. On May 4, 1987, Buena Vista Pictures Distribution signed a theatrical distribution agreement with Warner Bros. International for the release of Disney, Touchstone and Hollywood Pictures films in overseas markets, with Disney retaining full control of all distribution and marketing decisions on their product.  In 1992, Disney opted to end their joint venture with Warner Bros. to start autonomously distributing their films in the aforementioned markets . On February 6, 2014, Columbia TriStar Warner Filmes de Portugal Ltda., a joint venture with Sony Pictures which distributed both companie' films in Portugal, announced that it would close its doors on March 31, 2014.  NOS Audiovisuais handles distribution of Warner Bros. films in Portugal since then, while the distribution duties for Sony Pictures films in the country were taken over by Big Picture Films. Warner Bros. still handles the distribution of Sony Pictures films in Italy. Since January 1, 2021, Warner Bros. films are distributed through Universal Pictures in Hong Kong , Mexico , Australia and New Zealand citing WarnerMedi's closure of its Hong Kong theatrical office.  As of 2024, Warner Bros. currently handles theatrical distribution of Universal Pictures films in Brazil , India and the Philippines .    In August 2022, Warner Bros. Pictures entered into a multi-year deal for distributing MGM films outside the United States, including on home entertainment. The contract included joint participation of both companies for marketing, advertising, publicity, film distribution, and relationship with exhibitors for future MGM titles.  Film library Gate 4, Warner Bros. Studios, looking south towards the water tower For a more comprehensive list, see Lists of Warner Bros. films . Acquired libraries Mergers and acquisitions have helped Warner Bros. accumulate a diverse collection of films, cartoons and television programs. As of 2022, Warner Bros. owned more than 145,000 hours of programming, including 12,500 feature films and 2,400 television programs comprising more than tens of thousands of individual episodes.  In the aftermath of the 1948 antitrust suit, uncertain times led Warner Bros. in 1956 to sell most of its pre-1950     films and cartoons to Associated Artists Productions (a.a.p.). In addition, a.a.p. also obtained the Fleischer Studios and Famous Studios Popeye cartoons, originally from Paramount Pictures . Two years later, a.a.p. was sold to United Artists (UA), which owned the company until 1981, when Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) acquired United Artists.   In 1982, during their independent years, Turner Broadcasting System acquired Brut Productions , the film production arm of France-based then-struggling personal-care company Faberge Inc.  In 1986, Turner Broadcasting System acquired MGM. Finding itself in debt, Turner Entertainment kept the pre-May 1986 MGM film and television libraries and a small portion of the United Artists library (including the a.a.p. library and North American rights to the RKO Radio Pictures library) while spinning off the rest of MGM.  In 1989, Warner Communications acquired Lorimar-Telepictures Corporation.   Lorima's catalogue included the post-1974 library of Rankin/Bass Productions , and the post-1947 library of Monogram Pictures /Allied Artists Pictures Corporation. In 1991, Turner Broadcasting System acquired animation studio Hanna-Barbera and the Ruby-Spears library from Great American Broadcasting , and years later, Turner Broadcasting System acquired Castle Rock Entertainment on December 22, 1993,   and New Line Cinema on January 28, 1994.   On October 10, 1996, Time Warner acquired Turner Broadcasting System, thus bringing Warner Bros' pre-1950 library back home. However, Warner Bros. only owns Castle Rock Entertainmen's post-1994 library. In 2008, Time Warner integrated New Line Cinema into Warner Bros. Pictures. The Warner Bros. Archives The University of Southern California Warner Bros. Archives is the largest single studio collection in the world. Donated in 1977 to US's School of Cinema-Television by Warner Communications, the WBA houses departmental records that detail Warner Bros. activities from the studi's first major feature, My Four Years in Germany (1918), to its sale to Seven Arts in 1968. It presents a complete view of the production process during the Golden Age of Hollywood . UA donated pre-1950 Warner Bros. nitrate negatives to the Library of Congress and post-1951 negatives to the UCLA Film and Television Archive . Most of the compan's legal files, scripts, and production materials were donated to the Wisconsin Center for Film and Theater Research . See also Warner Bros. Studios, Burbank Warner Bros. Studio Tour Hollywood Warner Bros. Home Entertainment Warner Bros. Family Entertainment Warner Bros. Television Studios Warner Bros. Discovery Global Brands and Experiences Warner Records List of Warner Bros. short subjects Warner Bros. Animation Warner Bros. Studios, Leavesden

2024 film by Adam Wingard Godzilla x Kong: The New Empire  is a 2024 American monster film directed by Adam Wingard . Produced by Legendary Pictures and distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures , it is the sequel to Godzilla vs. Kong (2021) and the fifth film in the Monsterverse franchise, also serving as the 38th film of the Godzilla franchise and 13th in the King Kong franchise . The film stars Rebecca Hall , Brian Tyree Henry , Dan Stevens , Kaylee Hottle , Alex Ferns , and Fala Chen . Hall, Henry, and Hottle reprise their roles from the previous film. In the film, Kong encounters more of his species in the Hollow Earth and must unite again with Godzilla to stop the tyrannical Skar King and the powerful, frost-breathing Shimo from invading the Eart's surface. Following the box office and streaming success of Godzilla vs. Kong during the COVID-19 pandemic , Legendary announced a sequel in March 2022 and that filming would commence later that year. In May 2022, it was announced that Wingard would return to direct and Stevens had been cast as a lead. Filming began in July 2022 in the Gold Coast, Australia , and finished in November 2022. Godzilla x Kong: The New Empire premiered at Grauma's Chinese Theatre on March 25, 2024, and was released in the United States on March 29. The film received mixed reviews from critics, with many comparing it unfavorably to Godzilla Minus One . It grossed $570 million worldwide on a $135–150 million budget, becoming the third-highest-grossing film of 2024 , the highest-grossing film of the Monsterverse, as well as in the Godzilla and King Kong franchises. A sequel is set to be released on March 26, 2027. Plot [ edit ] Three years after defeating Mechagodzilla ,  Kong has established his new territory in the Hollow Earth and searches for more of his kind. On Eart's surface, Godzilla continues to maintain order between humanity and giant monsters, known as "Titans" — killing Titanus Scylla in Rome and resting in the Colosseum afterwards. A Monarch observation outpost stationed in Hollow Earth picks up an unidentified signal. On the surface, the signal causes Jia, the last known survivor of the Iwi tribe from Skull Island , to experience hallucinations and visions, causing her adoptive mother and Kong expert, Dr. Ilene Andrews, to worry. Also sensing the signal, Godzilla leaves Rome and attacks a nuclear plant in France to absorb radiation. He then heads to the lair of the Titan Tiamat in the Arctic . Monarch believes Godzilla is strengthening himself for an oncoming threat. When a sinkhole opens near his home, Kong discovers an uncharted realm where a tribe of his species has survived, including a juvenile named Suko. After a brief initial confrontation, Kong convinces Suko to lead him to the trib's lair, and the two slowly bond on their journey. The trib's tyrannical leader, Skar King, battles Kong with the aid of an ancient ice-powered Titan, Shimo, whom he controls with pain using a crystal. Shim's ice breath injures Kon's right arm, causing frostbite, but with Suk's help, Kong manages to escape after losing his axe. Andrews and Jia, alongside Titan veterinarian Trapper and conspiracy podcaster Bernie Hayes, travel to Hollow Earth to locate the source of the signal. They find the Monarch outpost destroyed. As the group follows the signal, they discover a temple that leads them to a subterranean section that houses a surviving Iwi tribe, who communicate telepathically with each other, living beneath portals to the surface. Inspecting some ruins, they surmise that the signal was a telepathic distress call sent by the Iwi. While observing Jia socializing with the Iwi, Andrews voices her fears to Trapper that Jia may choose to stay with her people and that Andrews would have to accept it. Inside a temple, Andrews uncovers hieroglyphics displaying the past and future: Skar King once attempted to conquer the surface world, forced Shimo to trigger an ice age , and waged war against Godzill's species, but Godzilla defeated him by trapping him and his tribe deep within Hollow Earth. The prophecy also indicates that Jia would be the key to reawakening Mothra . Sensing Jia, Kong locates the temple and is fitted by Trapper with a prototype exoskeletal glove to strengthen and heal his frostbitten limb. Unknown to them, one of Skar Kin's loyalists follows them and informs him that the protective barrier leading to the surface portals has been opened. Jia successfully awakens the reborn Mothra. Meanwhile, Godzilla kills Tiamat and absorbs cosmic radiation from her lair, which turns his dorsal plates magenta. Hoping to lure Godzilla to Hollow Earth to assist him, Kong surfaces in Cairo and calls out to Godzilla. Despite Kon's attempts to communicate, an enraged Godzilla attacks him, and a brief fight ensues until Mothra intervenes. Godzilla, Kong, and Mothra return to the Hollow Earth and engage Skar King and Shimo in battle. Skar King and Shimo manage to use one of the portals to escape to the surface, forcing Godzilla and Kong to chase them to Rio de Janeiro , and Shimo induces a second ice age at Skar Kin's command. The factions are evenly matched until Suko arrives with Kon's axe and destroys the crystal controlling Shimo. Shimo freezes Skar King before Kong shatters him to pieces. After undoing Shim's ice age with his atomic breath, Godzilla returns to rest in the Colosseum. Jia reunites with Andrews and alleviates her fears by choosing to stay with her adopted mother. Mothra restores the protective barrier of the Iw's home and the portals. Kong returns with Shimo and Suko to Hollow Earth, where he becomes the ape trib's new leader. Cast [ edit ] Rebecca Hall as Dr. Ilene Andrews, a scientist and anthropological linguist at Monarch Brian Tyree Henry as Bernie Hayes, a conspiracy theorist and former Apex employee Dan Stevens as Trapper, a veterinarian at Monarch Kaylee Hottle as Jia, last known survivor of the Iwi tribe and Ilen's adopted daughter Alex Ferns as Mikael, a pilot at Monarch Fala Chen as Iwi Queen Rachel House as Hampton Ron Smyck as Harris Chantelle Jamieson as Jayne Greg Hatton as Lewis Kevin Copeland as Submarine Commander Tess Dobré as Submarine Officer Tim Carroll as Wilcox Anthony Brandon Wong as Talk Show Announcer Allan Henry as Kong and Skar King ( performance capture )  Production [ edit ] Development [ edit ] In March 2019, producer Alex Garcia stated that Legendary Pictures hoped to produce more MonsterVerse films if they became successful, stating, "I's one brick at a time, each piece has to be as good as it can be, so right now i's all focused on this Godzilla: King of the Monsters and Godzilla vs. Kong . But could there be? Yeah, tha's the hope if the movies turn out really well."  In February 2021, Wingard commented on the future of the Monsterverse, "I know where we could go potentially with future films." However, he noted that the Monsterverse was created "to a certain degree" to lead towards Godzilla vs. Kong .  He added that the Monsterverse is at a "crossroads", stating, "I's really at the point where audiences have to kind of step forward and vote for more of these things. If this movie is a success obviously they will continue forward."  Godzilla vs. Kong was released on March 24, 2021, and became a box office and streaming hit during the COVID-19 pandemic .  The film grossed $470 million worldwide against a break-even point of $330 million,   and became the most pirated film of 2021.  On April 4, 2021, Legendar's CEO Josh Grode commented on potential sequels, "we have a number of ideas for more movies."  That same day, the hashtag #ContinueTheMonsterverse began trending on Twitter , which was acknowledged by Legendary and garnered support from Jordan Vogt-Roberts , director of Kong: Skull Island (2017).   On April 27, 2021, The Hollywood Reporter stated that Legendary was "quietly taking steps to stretch the series into one or more installments" while negotiating with Wingard to potentially return to direct. Various ideas were considered, with Son of Kong being one potential title.  In August 2021, Monsterverse writer Max Borenstein stated that "there will be some new, interesting installments coming" due to the success of Godzilla vs. Kong .  On March 20, 2022, it was announced that a sequel to Godzilla vs. Kong was scheduled to commence filming later in the year in the Gold Coast, Queensland , and other locations in South East Queensland .  In May 2022, it was announced that Wingard would return to direct and that Dan Stevens had been cast as a lead. Wingard and Stevens had previously worked together on The Guest (2014).  In May 2022, Production Weekly reported that the fil's working title was Origins .  On June 30, 2022, it was revealed that Mary Parent , Alex Garcia, Eric McLeod, Brian Rogers, Thomas Tull and Jon Jashni would return to produce.   On July 1, 2022, Toho confirmed that the film would feature Godzilla .  Pre-production [ edit ] Wingard recalled that preproduction on the film began in January 2022.  In August 2022, Warner Bros. Pictures and Legendary announced a new synopsis and that Rebecca Hall , Brian Tyree Henry and Kaylee Hottle would reprise their roles from Godzilla vs Kong while Fala Chen , Alex Ferns and Rachel House would join the cast as well. It was also revealed that Wingard would collaborate once more with production designer Tom Hammock, editor Josh Schaeffer, composer Tom Holkenborg , and that Terry Rossio had returned to write the script with Jeremy Slater and Wingar's frequent collaborator Simon Barrett .   Ultimately, Rossio, Barrett, and Slater received "screenplay by" credit, while Rossio, Wingard, and Barrett received "story by" credit; Michael Dougherty and Zach Shields, both of whom co-wrote Godzilla: King of the Monsters and Godzilla vs. Kong , shared off-screen "additional literary material" credit with James Ashcroft, Eli Kent , and Nicole Perlman .   Filming [ edit ] Principal photography commenced in the Gold Coast, Queensland, on July 29, 2022.  At the start of production, Ben Seresin was confirmed to have returned as director of photography.  In November 2022, it was reported that filming had finished in Australia and that crew gear revealed the fil's potential title, at the time, as Godzilla and Kong .  Post-production [ edit ] The fil's visual effects were supervised by Alessandro Ongaro.  Wingard confirmed that Mothra's inclusion was always part of the plan. However, Legendary did not have the rights to Mothra by the time that post-production began and used a placeholder character named "Phosphera" until the rights were secured. Wingard also refuted rumors that Phosphera was replaced with Mothra due to poor testing, iterating that Mothra was included as far back as the first draft.  Influences [ edit ] After watching the trailer for Godzilla Minus One (2023), Wingard and Ongaro decided to pay tribute to that film by recreating a shot of the ground bursting beneath Godzill's footfall for the fil's Rome sequence.  The Egyptian battle between Godzilla and Kong was inspired by the fight scene between Roddy Piper and Keith David from They Live (1988).  Music [ edit ] In August 2022, Tom Holkenborg was announced to return to compose the fil's score, after previously doing so for Godzilla vs. Kong .  In December 2023, it was announced that Antonio Di Iorio would co-compose the score with Holkenborg.  A single was released on March 13, 2024, by WaterTower Music , titled “Main Title Theme.” The full soundtrack album was released on March 22, 2024.  For the Japanese release, artists Ai , Yaffle, and OZworld contributed to the track " Rise Together " as the fil's theme and was released on April 17, 2024.  Release [ edit ] Theatrical [ edit ] Godzilla x Kong: The New Empire held its red carpet premiere at the Grauma's Chinese Theatre on March 25, 2024.  Afterward, it was released internationally on March 27 and in the United States on March 29,  and was released in Japan on April 26 via Toho.  It was previously slated to be released on March 15 and April 12.   Incidentally, Toh's Godzilla Minus One was withdrawn from U.S. theaters eight weeks before the release of Godzilla x Kong: The New Empire .  Home media [ edit ] The film was released on digital platforms on May 14, 2024, and on Blu-ray , DVD and Ultra HD Blu-ray on June 11, 2024.  Godzilla x Kong: The New Empire became available to stream on Max on July 4, 2024.  Reception [ edit ] Box office [ edit ] Godzilla x Kong: The New Empire has grossed $196.4 million in the United States and Canada and $373.6 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $569.7 million.  As of 2024, it holds the record for the highest-grossing Godzilla film ever.  In the United States and Canada, Godzilla x Kong was initially projected to gross $50–55 million from 3,850 theaters in its opening weekend and an additional $80–90 million from 63 international territories.  After making $37 million on its first day, including $10 million from Thursday previews, the best-ever total for a Monsterverse film, estimates were raised to $75 million over the domestic weekend. It went on to debut at $80 million, topping the box office and becoming the second-best opening weekend of the series and the fifth-best Easter weekend of all time, behind Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice (2016), Furious 7 (2015), The Super Mario Bros. Movie (2023) and The Fate of the Furious (2017).  In its second weekend, the film made $31.2 million (a drop of 61%), remaining in first.  In its third weekend, the film made $15.5 million, finishing second behind newcomer Civil War .  Meanwhile, the film debuted at number two in Japan, behind Detective Conan: The Million-dollar Pentagram .  Critical response [ edit ] Godzilla x Kong: The New Empire received mixed reviews from critics.   On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , 54% of 247 critic' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 5.6/10. The websit's consensus reads: "Come to Godzilla x Kong: The New Empire for the sheer monster-mashing spectacle -- and stay for that too, because the movie does't have much else to offer."  Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned the film a score of 47 out of 100, based on 51 critics, indicating "mixed or average" reviews.  Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A–" on an A+ to F scale, while PostTrak reported 96% of audience members said the film "met or exceeded their expectations."  Several critics compared the film unfavorably to Toho's Godzilla Minus One .  Owen Gleiberman of Variety found Godzilla x Kong: The New Empire mediocre, likening it more to a superhero film , but felt that it was misfortunate that the film was released too soon after Godzilla Minus One , comparing that film with "lyrical majesty" and Godzilla x Kong more like a "product", but admitted that the film delivers on the monster battles, praising the Rome battle.  Pete Hammond from Deadline Hollywood likened the scenes with the Ape tribe to Planet of the Apes and noted that Godzilla, despite getting top billing and referenced repeatedly in the film, mostly plays a supporting role. He felt the human characters were the same "one dimensional caricatures" typically found in monster films, but admitted that they had a "nice rapport" regardless. Like Gleiberman, Hammond compared the film to Godzilla Minus One , calling it "far more impressive" than Godzilla x Kong and suggested that Legendary hire that fil's team next.  James Berardinelli also expressed dissatisfaction for the film and suggested that Godzilla Minus One writer-director Takashi Yamazaki make the next Monsterverse film.  The Sioux City Journal criticized the fil's visual effects as inferior to those in Godzilla Minus One .  Beyond the main cast, the humans in this movie exist only to get squashed like ants by falling debris and mangled buildings. They are expendable, but it does't matter. The meaning of these films is't in metaphor at all. I's in punching. —Alissa Wilkinson, The New York Times  The Guardian praised the choreography and cited Rebecca Hall's performance as "ever luminous", but felt that Dan Stevens and Brian Tyree Henry struggled to convey the comedy they were entrusted with for their parts.  The fil's journey to the climax was a "mixed bag," wrote Empire , and its characters were "shallow but fun".  IndieWire attacked the CGI for being dull and not taking full advantage of its potential, suggesting that the filmmakers should have used Godzilla (2014) as a reference point to emphasize the gravitas of the monster scenes.  The Los Angeles Times described the film as a "roaring headache" but cited "two impressively goopy moments" in the beginning and the horror-like approach brought by the director "with a penchant for gleeful experimentation and over-the-top style".  Sequel [ edit ] Director Adam Wingard expressed interest in making a third film featuring both Godzilla and Kong , but noted that "it just depends on how Godzilla x Kong: The New Empire does and how things kind of shape out."  Wingard iterated that ideas have been discussed as to where to take the franchise onward and that he would take a "different approach" on the next film if h's invited back to direct.   He also suggested that the next film could potentially follow Godzilla primarily and explore his perspective in the same way that The New Empire followed Kong.  Commenting on the fil's box office success, producer and Legendar's chairman of worldwide production Mary Parent said, "This is certainly an exciting result. We are in a good position to continue the journey, but let’s see how Godzilla x Kong unfolds."  On May 10, 2024, Legendary announced that David Callaham , who wrote the early drafts for Godzilla (2014), will write a follow-up to Godzilla x Kong: The New Empire .  The following week, Legendary announced that Wingard would not return to direct due to scheduling conflicts, but expressed interest in Wingard returning in the future.  In June 2024, Legendary announced Grant Sputore as the new director and that the film would be released on March 26, 2027.

2024 DreamWorks Animation film Kung Fu Panda 4 is a 2024 American animated martial arts comedy film produced by DreamWorks Animation and distributed by Universal Pictures . It is the fourth installment in the Kung Fu Panda franchise and the sequel to Kung Fu Panda 3 (2016). The film was directed by Mike Mitchell , co-directed by Stephanie Ma Stine (in her feature directorial debut), written by Darren Lemke and the writing team of Jonathan Aibel and Glenn Berger , and produced by Rebecca Huntley. It features Jack Black , Ian McShane , Dustin Hoffman , James Hong , and Bryan Cranston reprising their roles from the previous films, with Awkwafina , Ke Huy Quan , Ronny Chieng , Lori Tan Chinn , and Viola Davis joining the cast as new characters. In the film, Po (Black), who must find and train his successor as the new Dragon Warrior, teams up with fox bandit Zhen (Awkwafina) to defeat evil sorceress The Chameleon (Davis), before she steals the kung-fu abilities of all masters in China. Directors Jennifer Yuh Nelson and Alessandro Carloni were asked about the possibility of a fourth Kung Fu Panda film before the release of the third film in January 2016, with Nelson later saying in August 2018 that she was open to a fourth installment. DreamWorks officially announced the fourth film in August 2022, with Mitchell, Ma Stine, and Huntley attached as director, co-director, and producer, respectively, by April 2023. Most of the main voice cast, along with the return of Aibel and Berger as writers and co-producers, was announced in December 2023, following Awkwafin's casting in May of that year. Lemk's involvement was confirmed in February 2024. Composer Hans Zimmer , who had scored for the previous three installments, the first two with John Powell and the third alone, returned as composer alongside frequent collaborator Steve Mazzaro. Some additional production assets were borrowed from Jellyfish Pictures . Kung Fu Panda 4 premiered at the AMC 14 Theater at The Grove in Los Angeles on March 3, 2024, and was theatrically released in the United States on March 8. The film received generally positive reviews from critics and was a box-office success, grossing over $545 million worldwide, making it the fourth highest-grossing film of 2024 . Plot [ edit ] In the Valley of Peace, Po helps his fathers Li Shan and Mr. Ping open their new restaurant. Master Shifu then tells Po that he must advance and become a spiritual leader, which means Po can no longer be the Dragon Warrior and must find a suitable successor to take his place. Po struggles to choose the right candidate as he does not want to lose his status, and he stumbles upon a corsac fox bandit named Zhen trying to steal ancient weapons from the Jade Palace. Po is able to outsmart Zhen and send her to prison, but a group of mine workers tell him that Tai Lung has returned and destroyed an entire quarry. Zhen reveals that Tai Lun's return was masqueraded by a sorceress known as The Chameleon, who can shape-shift into any animal she wants as well as copying various kung fu skills simply by touching them. With Zhe's assistance, Po heads to Juniper City to take down The Chameleon, little knowing that his fathers, worried that Po won’t stand a chance against her, are following them. After encountering a shifty tavern and fighting off the inhabitants, they soon arrive at Juniper City and are almost arrested, but escape to the Den of Thieves, where they receive aid from the de's leader Han, who is also a close friend of Zhen. From there, Po and Zhen head to The Chameleo's lair until Po is captured. It is then revealed that Zhen has been acting as a double agent for The Chameleon, and was tasked to acquire P's Staff of Wisdom  , which has the power to access the Spirit Realm. Po almost manages to escape, but The Chameleon, taking Zhe's form, fools him and throws him off a cliff, to Zhe's horror. He nearly falls to his death, but is rescued by his fathers, who convince him that sometimes change can be good. Using the staff, The Chameleon summons every deceased kung fu master and steals their skills, including Lord Shen , General Kai , and Tai Lung . After escaping for good, Zhen reunites with Po, but he refuses to back down from facing The Chameleon, so she, Mr. Ping and Li head back to the Den of Thieves to convince them to help them save Po. As they battle The Chameleo's army of Komodo dragons , Po tries but fails to reason with The Chameleon, although she does give the staff back to him as she no longer needs it. They battle, but when Zhen intervenes, The Chameleon turns into a Chimera of several kung fu masters. After the battle, she then shifts into a copycat of Po, fights him, and soon traps him in a cage before reverting back to her original form. Putting his trust in Zhen, Po gives her the staff, with which she bests The Chameleon. Po, who was only pretending to be trapped, defeats The Chameleon using the staff and returns all of the stolen kung fu to their owners, who show respect to Po and return to the Spirit Realm, with Tai Lung taking The Chameleon with him. While returning to the Valley of Peace, Po chooses Zhen as his successor, much to Shif's annoyance. Confident with his choice, Po and the Furious Five help train Zhen to become the next Dragon Warrior. Voice cast [ edit ] Jack Black as Po , a giant panda who is set to become a spiritual leader after renouncing his title as the Dragon Warrior.  Black also voices The Chameleo's form of Po. Awkwafina as Zhen, a corsac fox who is a wanted thief and accompanies Po on his journey.  Awkwafina also voices The Chameleo's form of Zhen. Viola Davis as The Chameleon, a nefarious shape-shifting chameleon sorceress that can copy other' kung fu by absorbing their abilities and Zhe's boss.  Dustin Hoffman as Master Shifu, a wise red panda and P's master.  James Hong as Mr. Ping, a Chinese goose and P's adoptive father.  Bryan Cranston as Li Shan, P's biological father.  Ian McShane as Tai Lung, a snow leopard who was Shif's adopted son and former disciple until he became evil. Po vanquished him to the Spirit Realm in the first film and General Kai captured him off-screen during the third film , but The Chameleon brings him back from the Spirit Realm. In this film, Tai Lung is the secondary antagonist after being the main antagonist of the 2008 film .  McShane also voices The Chameleo's form of Tai Lung. Ke Huy Quan as Han, a Sunda pangolin who is the leader of a den of thieves.  Lori Tan Chinn as Granny Boar, an elderly female boar who can take out her tusks and use them as weapons.  Ronny Chieng as Captain Fish, a green arowana that lives in a pelican's mouth, who is his seemingly adoptive mother. Harry Shum Jr. as Scott, a fire-breathing crocodile who was sent to the Spirit Realm by Po. The Furious Five make a brief non-speaking appearance in the end credits with the exception of Seth Rogen providing screams for Mantis. Lord Shen and General Kai also have non-speaking appearances when The Chameleon is summoning villains from the Spirit Realm. YouTuber Jimmy "MrBeast" Donaldson has a cameo as Panda Pig, a pig painted black-and-white who is one of the 5 candidates for the next Dragon Warrior.  Production [ edit ] Development [ edit ] On December 3, 2010, then- DreamWorks Animation CEO Jeffrey Katzenberg said that there was a possibility the series could have three more sequels after Kung Fu Panda 3 , bringing it to a six-film series.  On January 13, 2016, Collider asked the filmmakers of Kung Fu Panda 3 about the possibility of a fourth film. Co-director Jennifer Yuh Nelson stated, "I's one at a time. We want to make this a perfect jewel, and then w'll see what happens after that". Co-director Alessandro Carloni said, "With the sequels, we do't want to try to have them feel open-ended. We want it to feel like a completed journey, and we feel this movie does. And then, if a fantastic story presents itself, great".  On August 2, 2018, when asked about the possibility of Kung Fu Panda 4 , Nelson replied that she always saw the series as a trilogy, but was open for a fourth installment as long as the franchise focused on Po .  In August 2022, DreamWorks Animation confirmed that Kung Fu Panda 4 was in production.  At CinemaCon in April 2023, more details for the film were revealed, such as the premise as described by Jack Black .  It was also announced that Mike Mitchell was set to direct the film, with Stephanie Ma Stine co-directing and Rebecca Huntley producing.  Mitchell was a creative consultant on the first film and an executive producer on the third film. The film was originally planned to be a live-action/animated hybrid, according to Ma Stine. Characters such as The Chameleon (known as The Collector) and Zhen would have been humans. This would all eventually be scrapped.  Writing [ edit ] By December 2023, it was reported that Jonathan Aibel and Glenn Berger returned to write the screenplay.  In February 2024, Darren Lemke was revealed to have co-written the screenplay.  Mitchell described Kung Fu Panda 4 as a love letter to the first film .   Despite its connections to previous entries in the series, he wanted the story to stand on its own.  When producing the third film, Mitchell felt that P's character development from the first film was wrapping up due to finally becoming the Dragon Warrior, so he wondered what if another sequel took "all that" away, leading the filmmakers to find some "really great heavy themes" that they felt are important for the modern world.  Additionally, Mitchell wanted to evolve P's character, introduce new characters, and expand the franchis's world,  feeling that the film took so long to be produced because the filmmakers wanted a perfect story that could evolve Po by making him learn something to advance to the next level.  He described Po as having a black-and-white view of the world and wanted to pair him with a more morally grey character, Zhen. Mitchell also wanted a character who Po can be frustrated by, like how Shifu gets frustrated by him.  For The Chameleon, Mitchell sought to make her a more-brain-than-brawn kind of villain.  He went on to say that she is the smartest and most supernatural foe Po has faced.   He described The Chameleon as a mirror to Po in that both characters were underestimated by society for their bodies, but went on to gain high status. He said, "So Po has become the greatest hero, and now sh's the greatest villain".  Mitchell felt that one of the things the Kung Fu Panda franchise stands out for, aside from Blac's Po, are its villains, so he made sure that The Chameleon could be as formidable as Tai Lung, Lord Shen and General Kai, hence his reasoning to specifically bring the former back into this seque's story.  Casting [ edit ] In May 2023, it was reported that Awkwafina had joined the voice cast of the film.  In December 2023, it was announced that Ke Huy Quan and Viola Davis would join the cast, with the latter playing the villain of the film, The Chameleon.   Lori Tan Chinn and Ronny Chieng were also announced as new cast members,  with Ian McShane , Bryan Cranston , James Hong , and Dustin Hoffman reprising their roles from the previous films.   Mitchell stated that he is a fan of McShan's work and that it was a "blast" to be able to work with him; had McShane refused to reprise his role as Tai Lung, there was no alternate plan for the fil's story, as filmmakers had "locked in" for Tai Lun's return.  In December 2023, Mitchell stated that Masters Tigress, Monkey, Crane, Mantis, and Viper—known collectively as the Furious Five—would make an appearance in the film and that they are "off on their own individual missions", with producer Rebecca Huntley confirming that there would be "a glimpse of the Furious Five".   In a March 2024 Discord Q&A session in a fan server, co-director Stephanie Ma Stine noted that the Furious Five were not originally going to appear despite protests from writers, artists, and animators. Ma Stine explained that it was due to the costs of the original actors, especially Angelina Jolie as Tigress. However, the marketing department told the filmmakers to include them in a cameo appearance.  She also expressed interest in having SungWon Cho be part of the film.  Animation and design [ edit ] Mitchell stated that the fil's fight scenes reflect advances in both technology and kung fu ,  and took more influence from anime than previous films in the series.  Stunt performers from Marvel films joined production to give the animators moves to study and use in the choreography.  The Chameleon was DreamWork' most complex character to animate, with a total of 8,130 controls.  While most of the animation for the film was provided by DreamWorks Animation Glendale, Jellyfish Pictures —who previously worked with DreamWorks on How to Train Your Dragon: Homecoming , Spirit Untamed , The Boss Baby: Family Business , and The Bad Guys —handled the additional asset production services using proprietary software like Premo and Moonray. Kung Fu Panda 4 and The Wild Robot will be the last two films to be made entirely in-house at DreamWorks Animation, as Cartoon Brew reported on October 6, 2023, that the studio would be moving away from producing films in-house in their Glendale campus to rely more heavily on outside studios after 2024.  Music [ edit ] Main article: Kung Fu Panda 4 (soundtrack) In December 2023, Hans Zimmer and Steve Mazzaro, the former of whom also composed for the first three films, were announced to compose the fil's score.  A cover of Britney Spears' " ...Baby One More Time " by Tenacious D is featured in the end credits. The album was released on March 8, 2024, simultaneously with the movi's release, by Back Lot Music . Marketing [ edit ] Po returned to the Mac's Thanksgiving Day Parade in November 2023 as promotion for the film.  The trailer for the film, featuring The White Stripes' " Seven Nation Army ", along with a poster, was released on December 13, 2023. The trailer was viewed over 142 million times in the first 24 hours across all social media , becoming the most-viewed trailer for a Universal animated film, surpassing Illumination's The Super Mario Bros. Movie , Minions: The Rise of Gru , Sing 2 and DreamWork' own Puss in Boots: The Last Wish .  Release [ edit ] Theatrical [ edit ] Kung Fu Panda 4 premiered at the AMC 14 Theater at The Grove in Los Angeles on March 3, 2024, and was released in the United States on March 8,   with showtimes a day prior.  The film was shown at the Columbia University School of the Arts on March 1, 2024.  Home media [ edit ] Kung Fu Panda 4 was released on digital download on April 9, 2024, and on 4K , Blu-ray , and DVD on May 28, by Universal Pictures Home Entertainment . A short film titled Dueling Dumplings was released alongside it.   As part of Universa's deal with Netflix , the film will stream on Peacock for the first four months of the pay-TV window, before moving to Netflix for the next ten, and returning to Peacock for the remaining four.   However, on June 6, 2024, it was announced that Kung Fu Panda 4 will be released on Peacock on June 21, 2024. Reception [ edit ] Box office [ edit ] As of June 4, 2024  , Kung Fu Panda 4 has grossed $193.6 million in the United States and Canada and $351.8 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $545.4 million.   In the United States and Canada, Kung Fu Panda 4 was released alongside Imaginary and Cabrini , and was projected to gross $45–50 million from 3,900 theaters in its opening weekend.   The film made $19.4 million on its first day, including $3.8 million from Thursday night previews.   It went on to debut to $58 million, topping the box office and becoming the highest opening weekend for a DreamWorks Animation film since Madagascar 3: Europ's Most Wanted in 2012.   The film made $30.1 million in its second weekend (a drop of 48%), remaining in first.  It made $16.5 million in its third weekend, finishing in third behind newcomer Ghostbusters: Frozen Empire and Dune: Part Two .  Kung Fu Panda 4 completed its domestic theatrical run on June 6, 2024.  Critical response [ edit ] The reception for Kung Fu Panda 4 was generally positive.  On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , 72% of 157 critic' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 6.1/10. The websit's consensus reads: " Kung Fu Panda 4 offers enough eye-catching entertainment to sustain the franchis's young fans, although i's starting to feel like this series is running out of steam."  Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned the film a score of 54 out of 100, based on 33 critics, indicating "mixed or average" reviews.  Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A–" on an A+ to F scale (the same as the first film ), while those polled by PostTrak gave it an 80% overall positive score, with 59% saying they would recommend it.  Frank Scheck of The Hollywood Reporter wrote, "With its new settings and characters, including Oscar winner Ke Huy Quan as a pangolin leader of a den of thieves and Ronnie Chieng as a fish that lives in a pelica's mouth, Kung Fu Panda 4 clearly aims to refresh the franchise. But i's really more of the same, which is not such a bad thing when you consider that the series has grossed some $1.8 billion so far (and tha's not including the spin-off projects, including various television series and video games). Its appeal still lies largely in Blac's hilarious vocal performance which has lost none of its charm."  Wilson Chapman of IndieWire gave the film a B- and wrote, "Black can, at this point, play this role in his sleep, but he still gives it his all in his fourth go around, and his pitch perfect comic timing and lovable earnestness makes the journey an easy one to take."  For The New York Times , Claire Shaffer complimented the fil's art direction and Black and Awkwafin's chemistry; overall, she felt it "is an enjoyable Kung Fu Panda movie, even if i's missing some of the pizazz of the earlier ones."  Mentioning the relatively lower budget of this installment, a review in Le Devoir found that it allowed the film to focus more efficiently on'the essence of the art of cartoon (but by computer all the same), its Disneyesque characters, and the settings, still rich in depth and color, of the Valley of Peace, this fantastic reproduction of Ancient China'  Owen Gleiberman of Variety unfavorably compared the film to its predecessors, writing, "Even after 16 years of Po, you want to hear Jack Blac's voice charged with that youthful cockeyed exuberance, rather than the older-and-wiser aura he exudes here. You also wish the movie had better jokes. Mitchell, co-directing with Stephanie Stine, does't stage the action bouts with the surreal freedom that animation makes possible. Po goes through the motions, but 'm sorry, the kick is gone."  Similarly, The Boston Globe's Odie Henderson expressed disappointment with the fil's villain and action sequences, concluding "I enjoyed the first three adventures of the Dragon Warrior, but the best thing he can do now is to give this series a much needed skadoosh, sending it to rest in the cinematic spirit realm."  Christy Lemire , in her review for RogerEbert.com , wrote Kung Fu Panda 4 "struggles to justify its existence. It lacks both the delicate artistry and warm wit of its predecessors. The subtle sense of spirituality is long gone; in its place are frantic action sequences."  In a mixed review for the Los Angeles Times , Katie Walsh stated that'Though visually dazzling,'Kung Fu Panda ' shows a flabby franchise in need of punc'.  Mark Kermode gave the film a negative review.  Accolades [ edit ] The film is nominated for Favorite Animated Movie , Favorite Male Voice from an Animated Movie for Jack Black and Favorite Female Voice from an Animated Movie for Awkwafina at the 2024 Kid' Choice Awards .

American film studio Universal City Studios LLC , doing business as Universal Pictures (informally as Universal Studios or also known simply as Universal ) is an American film production and distribution company, a division of Universal Studios , which is owned by NBCUniversal , a division of Comcast . Founded in 1912 by Carl Laemmle , Mark Dintenfass , Charles O. Baumann , Adam Kessel , Pat Powers , William Swanson, David Horsley , Robert H. Cochrane, and Jules Brulatour , Universal is the oldest surviving film studio in the United States and the fifth oldest in the world after Gaumont , Pathé , Titanus , and Nordisk Film , and is one of the "Big Five" film studios . The most commercially successful film franchises from Universal include Fast & Furious , Jurassic Park , and Despicable Me . Additionally, the studi's library includes many individual films such as Jaws and E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial , both of which became the highest-grossing films of all time during their initial releases. Universal Pictures is a member of the Motion Picture Association (MPA), and was one of the "Little Three" majors during Hollywoo's golden age .  History Early years Carl Laemmle (1867–1939) Mark Dintenfass (1872–1933), co-founder of Universal Universal was founded by Carl Laemmle , Mark Dintenfass, Charles O. Baumann , Adam Kessel, Pat Powers , William Swanson, David Horsley , Robert H. Cochrane  and Jules Brulatour . One story has Laemmle watching a box office for hours, counting patrons, and calculating the da's takings. Within weeks of his Chicago trip, Laemmle gave up dry goods to buy the first several nickelodeons . For Laemmle and other such entrepreneurs, the creation in 1908 of the Edison-backed Motion Picture Patents Company (or the "Edison Trust") meant that exhibitors were expected to pay fees for Trust-produced films they showed. Based on the Latham Loop used in cameras and projectors, along with other patents, the Trust collected fees on all aspects of movie production and exhibition and attempted to enforce a monopoly on distribution. Soon, Laemmle and other disgruntled nickelodeon owners decided to avoid paying Edison by producing their own pictures. In June 1909, Laemmle started the Yankee Film Company with his brothers-in-law  Abe Stern and Julius Stern .  That company quickly evolved into the Independent Moving Pictures Company (IMP), with studios in Fort Lee, New Jersey , where many early films in Americ's first motion picture industry were produced in the early 20th century.     Laemmle broke with Ediso's custom of refusing to give billing and screen credits to performers. By naming the movie stars, he attracted many of the leading players of the time, contributing to the creation of the star system . In 1910, he promoted Florence Lawrence , formerly known as " The Biograph Girl ",  and actor King Baggot , in what may be the first instance of a studio using stars in its marketing. Poster for Ivanhoe (1913) The Universal Film Manufacturing Company was incorporated in New York City on April 30, 1912.  Laemmle, who emerged as president in July 1912, was the primary figure in the partnership with Dintenfass, Baumann, Kessel, Powers, Swanson, Horsley, and Brulatour. The company was established on June 8, 1912, formed in a merger of Independent Moving Pictures (IMP), the Powers Motion Picture Company , Rex Motion Picture Manufacturing Company , Champion Film Company , Nestor Film Company , and the New York Motion Picture Company .  Eventually all would be bought out by Laemmle. The new Universal studio was a vertically integrated company , with movie production, distribution, and exhibition venues all linked in the same corporate entity, the central element of the Studio system era. Melodrama A Great Love (1916) by Clifford S. Elfelt for Universal Big U. Dutch intertitles, 12:33. Collection EYE Film Institute Netherlands . Following the westward trend of the industry, by the end of 1912, the company was focusing its production efforts in the Hollywood area. Universal Weekly and Moving Picture Weekly  were the alternating names of Universa's internal magazine that began publication in this era; the magazine was intended to market Universa's films to exhibitors.  Since much of Universa's early film output was destroyed in subsequent fires and nitrate degradation, the surviving issues of these magazines are a crucial source for film historians.  Universal advertisement touting the benefit of the studi's short films to theater operators  On March 15, 1915,  : 8 Laemmle opened the worl's largest motion picture production facility, Universal City Studios , on a 230-acre (0.9-km 2 ) converted farm just over the Cahuenga Pass from Hollywood.  Studio management became the third facet of Universa's operations, with the studio incorporated as a distinct subsidiary organization. Unlike other movie moguls, Laemmle opened his studio to tourists. Universal became the largest studio in Hollywood and remained so for a decade. However, it sought an audience mostly in small towns, producing mostly inexpensive melodramas , westerns , and serials . In 1916, Universal formed a three-tier branding system for their releases. Unlike the top-tier studios, Universal did not own any theaters to market its feature films. Universal branding their product gave theater owners and audiences a quick reference guide.  Branding would help theater owners judge films they were about to lease and help fans decide which movies they wanted to see. Universal released three different types of feature motion pictures:   Red Feather Photoplays – low-budget feature films Bluebird Photoplays – mainstream feature release and more ambitious productions Jewel – prestige motion pictures featuring high budgets using prominent actors Directors of "Jewel" films included Jack Conway , John Ford , Rex Ingram , Robert Z. Leonard , George Marshall , and Lois Weber , one of the few women directing films in Hollywood.  : 13 Starting in the mid-1920s, Universal branded its most expensive and heavily-promoted feature films as "Super-Jewel" productions. These included films such as Erich von Stroheim's Foolish Wives (1922), Clarence Brown's The Acquittal (1923), Hobart Henley's A Lady of Quality (1924), Harry A. Pollard's Uncle To's Cabin (1927), and Edward Sloman's Surrender (1928). Despite Laemml's role as an innovator, he was an extremely cautious studio chief. Unlike rivals Adolph Zukor , William Fox , and Marcus Loew , Laemmle chose not to develop a theater chain . He also financed all of his own films, refusing to take on debt. This policy nearly bankrupted the studio when actor-director Erich von Stroheim insisted on excessively lavish production values for his films Blind Husbands (1919) and Foolish Wives (1922), but Universal shrewdly gained a return on some of the expenditure by launching a sensational ad campaign that attracted moviegoers. Character actor Lon Chaney became a drawing card for Universal in the mid-1910s, appearing steadily in dramas. However, Chaney left Universal in 1917 because of a salary dispute, and his two biggest hits for Universal were made as isolated returns to the studio: The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1923) and The Phantom of the Opera (1925).  During the early 1920s Laemmle entrusted most of Universa's production policy decisions to Irving Thalberg . Thalberg had been Laemml's personal secretary, and Laemmle was impressed by his cogent observations of how efficiently the studio could be operated. Promoted to studio chief in 1919, Thalberg made distinct improvements of quality and prestige in Universa's output in addition to dealing with star director Erich von Stroheim's increasing inability to control the expense and length of his films, eventually firing Stroheim on October 6, 1922, six weeks into the production of Merry-Go-Round (1923) and replacing him with Rupert Julian . Louis B. Mayer lured Thalberg away from Universal in late 1922 to his own growing studio, Louis B. Mayer Productions , as vice-president in charge of production, and when Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer was formed in 1924 Thalberg continued in the same position for the new company. Without Thalber's guidance, Universal became a second-tier studio and would remain so for several decades. Share of the Deutsche Universal-Film AG, issued March 4, 1930 In 1926, Universal opened a production unit in Germany, Deutsche Universal-Film AG, under the direction of Joe Pasternak . This unit produced three to four films per year until 1936, migrating to Hungary and then Austria in the face of Hitler's increasing domination of central Europe. With the advent of sound, these productions were made in the German language or, occasionally, Hungarian or Polish. In the U.S., Universal Pictures did not distribute any of this subsidiar's films. Still, some of them were exhibited through other independent, foreign-language film distributors based in New York City without the benefit of English subtitles. Nazi persecution and a change in ownership for the parent Universal Pictures organization resulted in the dissolution of this subsidiary. In the early years, Universal had a "clean picture" policy. However, by April 1927, Carl Laemmle considered this a mistake as "unclean pictures" from other studios generated more profit while Universal lost money.  Oswald the Lucky Rabbit In early 1927, Universal had been negotiating deals with cartoon producers since they wanted to get back into producing them. On March 4, Charles Mintz signed a contract with Universal in the presence of its vice president, R. H. Cochrane. Mint's company, Winkler Pictures, was to produce 26 " Oswald the Lucky Rabbit " cartoons for Universal.  Walt Disney and Ub Iwerks created the character and the Walt Disney Studio provided the animation for the cartoons under Winkle's supervision. The films enjoyed a successful theatrical run, and Mintz would sign a contract with Universal ensuring three more years of Oswald cartoons.  However, after Mintz had unsuccessfully demanded that Disney accept a lower fee for producing the films, Mintz took most of Wal's animators to work at his own studio. Disney and Iwerks would create Mickey Mouse in secret while they finished the remaining Oswald films they were contractually obligated to finish. Universal subsequently severed its link to Mintz and formed its own in-house animation studio to produce Oswald cartoons headed by Walter Lantz , which would later result in the creation of Woody Woodpecker in 1940. In February 2006, NBCUniversal sold all the Disney-animated Oswald cartoons, along with the rights to the character himself, to The Walt Disney Company . In return, Disney released ABC sportscaster Al Michaels from his contract so he could work on NB's recently acquired Sunday night NFL football package . Universal retained ownership of the remaining Oswald cartoons. Keeping leadership of the studio in the family Logo version from 1931 Bela Lugosi in Dracula (1931) Boris Karloff in Bride of Frankenstein (1935) In 1928, Laemmle Sr. made his son, Carl Jr. , head of Universal Pictures, a 21st birthday present. Universal already had a reputation for nepotism —at one time, 70 of Carl Sr's relatives were supposedly on the payroll. Many of them were nephews, resulting in Carl Sr. being known around the studios as "Uncle Carl". Ogden Nash famously quipped in rhyme, "Uncle Carl Laemmle/Has a very large faemmle". Among these relatives was future Academy Award-winning director/producer William Wyler . "Junior," Laemmle persuaded his father to bring Universal up to date. He bought and built theaters, converted the studio to sound production, and made several forays into high-quality production. His early efforts included the critically panned part-talkie version of Edna Ferber's novel Show Boat (1929), the lavish musical Broadway (1929) which included Technicolor sequences; and the first all-color musical feature (for Universal), King of Jazz (1930). The more serious All Quiet on the Western Front (1930) won its yea's Best Picture Oscar . Laemmle Jr. created a niche for the studio, beginning a series of horror films which extended into the 1940s, affectionately dubbed Universal horror . Among them are Dracula (1931), Frankenstein (1931), The Mummy (1932) and The Invisible Man (1933). Other Laemmle productions of this period include Tay Garnett's Destination Unknown (1933), John M. Stahl's Imitation of Life (1934) and William Wyle's The Good Fairy (1935). The Laemmles lose control Universa's forays into high-quality production spelled the end of the Laemmle era at the studio. Taking on the task of modernizing and upgrading a film conglomerate in the depths of the Great Depression was risky, and for a time, Universal slipped into receivership . The theater chain was scrapped , but Carl Jr. held fast to distribution, studio, and production operations. The end for the Laemmles came with a lavish version of Show Boat (1936), a remake of its earlier 1929 part-talkie production, and produced as a high-quality, big-budget film rather than as a B-picture . The new film featured several stars from the Broadway stage version, which began production in late 1935, and unlike the 1929 film, was based on the Broadway musical rather than the novel. Carl Jr's spending habits alarmed company stockholders. They would not allow production to start on Show Boat unless the Laemmles obtained a loan. Universal was forced to seek a $750,000 production loan from the Standard Capital Corporation, pledging the Laemmle famil's controlling interest in Universal as collateral . It was the first time Universal had borrowed money for a production in its 26-year history. The production went $300,000 over budget; Standard called in the loan, cash-strapped Universal could not pay, and Standard foreclosed and seized control of the studio on April 2, 1936. Although Universa's 1936 Show Boat (released a little over a month later) became a critical and financial success, it was not enough to save the Laemmle' involvement with the studio. They were unceremoniously removed from the company they had founded. Because the Laemmles personally oversaw production, Show Boat was released (despite the takeover) with Carl Laemmle and Carl Laemmle Jr's names on the credits and in the fil's advertising campaign. Standard Capita's J. Cheever Cowdin had taken over as president and chairman of the board of directors and instituted severe cuts in production budgets. Joining him were British entrepreneurs C.M. Woolf and J. Arthur Rank , who bought a significant stake in the studio.  Gone were the big ambitions, and though Universal had a few big names under contract, those it had been cultivating, like William Wyler and Margaret Sullavan , left. Meanwhile, producer Joe Pasternak, who had been successfully producing light musicals with young sopranos for Universa's German subsidiary, repeated his formula in the United States. Teenage singer Deanna Durbin starred in Pasterna's first American film, Three Smart Girls (1936). The film was a box-office hit and reputedly resolved the studi's financial problems. The fil's success led Universal to offer her a contract, which for the first five years of her career, produced her most successful pictures. James Stewart and Marlene Dietrich in Destry Rides Again (1939) When Pasternak stopped producing Durbi's pictures, and she outgrew her screen persona and pursued more dramatic roles, the studio signed 13-year-old Gloria Jean for her own series of Pasternak musicals from 1939; she went on to star with Bing Crosby , W. C. Fields , and Donald 'Connor . A popular Universal film of the late 1930s was Destry Rides Again (1939), starring James Stewart as Destry and Marlene Dietrich in her comeback role after leaving Paramount . By the early 1940s, the company was concentrating on lower-budget productions that were the compan's main staple: westerns, melodramas, serials, and sequels to the studi's horror pictures, the latter now solely B pictures. The studio fostered many series: The Dead End Kids and Little Tough Guys action features and serials (1938–43); the comic adventures of infant Baby Sandy (1938–41); comedies with Hugh Herbert (1938–42) and The Ritz Brothers (1940–43); musicals with Robert Paige , Jane Frazee , The Andrews Sisters , and The Merry Macs (1938–45); and westerns with Tom Mix (1932–33), Buck Jones (1933–36), Bob Baker (1938–39), Johnny Mack Brown (1938–43); Rod Cameron (1944–45), and Kirby Grant (1946–47). Universal could seldom afford its own stable of stars and often borrowed talent from other studios or hired freelance actors. In addition to Stewart and Dietrich, Margaret Sullavan and Bing Crosby were two of the major names that made a couple of pictures for Universal during this period. Some stars came from radio, including Edgar Bergen , W. C. Fields , and the comedy team of Abbott and Costello ( Bud Abbott and Lou Costello ). Abbott and Costell's military comedy Buck Privates (1941) gave the former burlesque comedians a national and international profile. During the war years, Universal did have a co-production arrangement with producer Walter Wanger and his partner, director Fritz Lang , lending the studio some amount of prestige productions. Universa's core audience base was still found in the neighborhood movie theaters , and the studio continued to please the public with low- to medium-budget films. Basil Rathbone and Nigel Bruce in new Sherlock Holmes mysteries (1942–46), teenage musicals with Gloria Jean , Donald 'Connor , and Peggy Ryan (1942–43), and screen adaptations of radi's Inner Sanctum Mysteries with Lon Chaney Jr. (1943–45). Alfred Hitchcock was also borrowed for two films from Selznick International Pictures : Saboteur (1942) and Shadow of a Doubt (1943). As Universa's main product had always been lower-budgeted films, it was one of the last major studios to contract with Technicolor . The studio did not make use of the three-strip Technicolor process until Arabian Nights (1942), starring Jon Hall and Maria Montez . Technicolor was also used for the studi's remake of their 1925 horror melodrama, Phantom of the Opera (1943) with Claude Rains and Nelson Eddy . With the success of their first two pictures, a regular schedule of high-budget Technicolor films followed. Universal International and Decca Records In 1945, J. Arthur Rank, who had already owned a stake in the studio almost a decade before, hoping to expand his American presence, bought into a four-way merger with Universal, the independent company International Pictures , and producer Kenneth Young. The new combine, United World Pictures, was a failure and was dissolved within one year. However, Rank and International remained interested in Universal, culminating in the studi's reorganization as Universal-International; the merger was announced on July 30, 1946.  William Goetz , a founder of International along with Leo Spitz , was made head of production at the renamed Universal International Pictures , a subsidiary of Universal Pictures Company, Inc. which also served as an import-export subsidiary, and copyright holder for the production ar's films. Goetz, a son-in-law of Louis B. Mayer , decided to bring "prestige" to the new company. He stopped the studi's low-budget production of B movies , serials and curtailed Universa's horror and " Arabian Nights " cycles. He also reduced the studi's output from its wartime average of fifty films per year (nearly twice the major studi's output) to thirty-five films a year.  Distribution and copyright control remained under the name of Universal Pictures Company Inc. Universal International Studio, 1955 Goetz set out an ambitious schedule. Universal-International became responsible for the American distribution of Ran's British productions, including such classics as David Lean's Great Expectations (1946) and Laurence Olivier's Hamlet (1948). Broadening its scope further, Universal-International branched out into the lucrative non-theatrical field, buying a majority stake in home-movie dealer Castle Films in 1947 and taking the company over entirely in 1951. For three decades, Castle would offer "highlights" reels from the Universal film library to home-movie enthusiasts and collectors. Goetz licensed Universa's pre–Universal-International film library to Jack Broede's Realart Pictures for cinema re-release, but Realart was not allowed to show the films on television. The production arm of the studio still struggled. While there were to be a few hits like The Killers (1946) and The Naked City (1948), Universal-Internationa's new theatrical films often met with disappointing response at the box office. By the late 1940s, Goetz was out. The studio returned to low-budget and series films such as Ma and Pa Kettle (1949), a spin-off of the studi's 1947 hit The Egg and I and the inexpensive Francis (1950), the first film of a series about a talking mule, became mainstays of the company. Once again, the films of Abbott and Costello, including Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein (1948), were among the studi's top-grossing productions. But at this point, Rank lost interest and sold his shares to the investor Milton Rackmil , whose Decca Records would take full control of Universal in 1952. Besides Abbott and Costello, the studio retained the Walter Lantz cartoon studio, whose product was released with Universal-Internationa's films. In the 1950s, Universal-International resumed their series of Arabian Nights films, many starring Tony Curtis . The studio also had success with monster and science fiction films produced by William Alland , with many directed by Jack Arnold and starring John Agar . Other successes were the melodramas directed by Douglas Sirk and produced by Ross Hunter , which were critically reassessed more positively years later. Among Universal-Internationa's stable of stars were Rock Hudson , Tony Curtis , Jeff Chandler , Audie Murphy , and John Gavin . Although Decca would continue to keep picture budgets lean, it was favored by changing circumstances in the film business, as other studios let their contract actors go in the wake of the 1948 U.S. vs. Paramount Pictures, et al. decision. Leading actors were increasingly free to work where and when they chose, and in 1950 MCA agent Lew Wasserman made a deal with Universal for his client James Stewart that would change the rules of the business. Wasserma's deal gave Stewart a share in the profits of three pictures in lieu of a large salary. When one of those films, Winchester'73 (1950), proved to be a hit, the arrangement would become the rule for many future productions at Universal and eventually at other studios as well. MCA takes over Ceremonial gate to Universal Studios Hollywood (the theme park attached to the studio lot) In the early 1950s, Universal set up its own distribution company in France . In the late 1960s, the company also started a production company in Paris , Universal Productions France S.A. , although sometimes credited by the name of the distribution company, Universal Pictures France . Except for the two first films it produced, Claude Chabrol's Le scandale (English title The Champagne Murders , 1967) and Romain Gary's Les oiseaux vont mourir au Pérou (English title Birds in Peru ), it was only involved in French or other European co-productions, including Louis Malle's Lacombe, Lucien , Bertrand Blier's Les Valseuses (English title Going Places , 1974), and Fred Zinnemann's The Day of the Jackal (1973). It was only involved in approximately 20 French film productions. In the early 1970s, the unit was incorporated into the French Cinema International Corporation arm. By the late 1950s, the motion picture business was again changing. The combination of the studio/theater-chain breakup and the rise of television saw the reduced audience size for cinema productions. The Music Corporation of America (MCA), the worl's largest talent agency, had also become a powerful television producer, renting space at Republic Studios for its Revue Productions subsidiary. After a period of complete shutdown, a moribund Universal agreed to sell its 360-acre (1.5 km 2 ) studio lot to MCA in 1958 for $11 million, renamed Revue Studios . MCA owned the studio lot, but not Universal Pictures, yet was increasingly influential on Universa's products. The studio lot was upgraded and modernized, while MCA clients like Doris Day , Lana Turner , Cary Grant , and director Alfred Hitchcock were signed to Universal contracts. The long-awaited takeover of Universal Pictures by MCA, Inc. happened in mid-1962 as part of the MCA- Decca Records merger. The company reverted in name to Universal Pictures from Universal-International. As a final gesture before leaving the talent agency business, virtually every MCA client was signed to a Universal contract. In 1964, MCA formed Universal City Studios, Inc ., merging the motion pictures and television arms of Universal Pictures Company and Revue Productions (officially renamed as Universal Television in 1966). And so, with MCA in charge, Universal became a full-blown, A-film movie studio, with leading actors and directors under contract; offering slick, commercial films; and a studio tour subsidiary launched in 1964. Television production made up much of the studi's output, with Universal heavily committed, in particular, to deals with NBC (which much later merged with Universal to form NBC Universal; see below ) providing up to half of all prime time shows for several seasons. An innovation during this period championed by Universal was the made-for-television movie. In 1982, Universal became the studio base for many shows that were produced by Norman Lear's Tandem Productions / Embassy Television , including Dif'rent Strokes , One Day at a Time , The Jeffersons , The Facts of Life , and Silver Spoons which premiered on NBC that same fall. At this time, Hal B. Wallis , who had recently worked as a major producer at Paramount, moved over to Universal, where he produced several films, among them a lavish version of Maxwell Anderson's Anne of the Thousand Days (1969) and the equally lavish Mary, Queen of Scots (1971).  Although neither could claim to be a big financial hit, both films received Academy Award nominations, and Anne was nominated for Best Picture , Best Actor ( Richard Burton ), Best Actress ( Geneviève Bujold ), and Best Supporting Actor ( Anthony Quayle ). Wallis retired from Universal after making the film Rooster Cogburn (1975), a sequel to True Grit (1969), which Wallis had produced at Paramount. Rooster Cogburn co-starred John Wayne , reprising his Oscar-winning role from the earlier film, and Katharine Hepburn , their only film together. The film was only a moderate success. In 1983, Universal Pictures launched an independent film arm designed to release specialty films, Universal Classics, and the division has sights on separation.  In 1987, Universal Pictures, MGM/UA Communications Co. , and Paramount Pictures teamed up to market feature film and television products to China. Consumer reach was measured in terms of the 25 billion admission tickets that were clocked in China in 1986, and Worldwide Media Sales, a division of the New York-based Worldwide Media Group, had been placed in charge of the undertaking.  In the early 1980s, the company had its own pay television arm Universal Pay Television (a.k.a. Universal Pay TV Programming, Inc.), which spawned in 1987, an 11-picture cable television agreement with then-independent film studio New Line Cinema .  In the early 1970s, Universal teamed up with Paramount to form Cinema International Corporation , which distributed films by Paramount and Universal outside of the US and Canada. Although Universal did produce occasional hits, among them Airport (1970), The Sting (1973), American Graffiti (also 1973), Earthquake (1974), and a big box-office success which restored the compan's fortunes: Jaws (1975), Universal during the decade was primarily a television studio. When Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer purchased United Artists in 1981, MGM could not drop out of the CIC venture to merge with United Artists overseas operations. However, with future film productions from both names being released through the MGM/UA Entertainment plate, CIC decided to merge U's international units with MGM and reformed as United International Pictures . There would be other film hits like Smokey and the Bandit (1977), Animal House (1978), The Jerk (1979), The Blues Brothers (1980), The Four Seasons (1981), E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial (1982), The Breakfast Club (1985), Back to the Future (also 1985), An American Tail (1986), The Land Before Time (1988), Field of Dreams (1989), Jurassic Park (1993) and Casper (1995), but the film business was financially unpredictable with some films like Scarface (1983), Dune (1984) or Waterworld (1995), which turned out to be big box office disappointments despite their high budget. UIP began distributing films by start-up studio DreamWorks in 1997 due to the founder' connections with Paramount, Universal, and Amblin Entertainment. In 2001, MGM dropped out of the UIP venture and went with 20th Century Fox's international arm to handle the distribution of their titles, an ongoing arrangement. UIP nearly lost its connection with Universal Pictures in 1999 when Universal started Universal Pictures International to take over the assets of PolyGram Filmed Entertainment and wanted UPI to distribute their films starting in 2001.  Only a small handful of films were released theatrically by Universal Pictures International, up until the release of the film Mickey Blue Eyes . UIP then took over the theatrical distribution inventory of future films planned to be released by Universal Pictures International, such as The Green Mile and Angel's Ashes .  On October 4, 1999, Universal renewed its commitments to United International Pictures to release its films internationally through 2006.   Matsushita, Seagram and Vivendi Logo used from 1996 to 2012, still used on some properties, such as the independent company, Universal Music Group Anxious to expand the compan's broadcast and cable presence, longtime MCA head Lew Wasserman sought a rich partner. He located Japanese electronics manufacturer Matsushita Electric (now known as Panasonic ), which agreed to acquire MCA for $6.6 billion in 1990. On December 9, 1996, the new owners dropped the MCA name; the company became Universal Studios, Inc.  and become the parent company of Universal Pictures, while Universal Pictures become a division. MC's music division, MCA Music Entertainment Group, was renamed Universal Music Group . MCA Records continued to live on as a label within the Universal Music Group. The following year, G. P. Putna's Sons was sold to the Penguin Group subsidiary of Pearson PLC . Afterward, Universal Pictures acquired the United States distribution rights of several of StudioCana's films, such as David Lynch's Mulholland Drive (2001) and Brotherhood of the Wolf (2001) which became the sixth-highest-grossing French-language film of all time in the United States.   Universal Pictures and StudioCanal also co-produced several films, such as Love Actually (2003); a $40 million-budgeted film that eventually grossed $246 million worldwide.  In late 2000, the New York Film Academy was permitted to use the Universal Studios backlot for student film projects in an unofficial partnership.  Expansions In September 2013, Adam Fogelson was ousted as co-chairman of Universal Pictures, promoting Donna Langley to the sole chairperson. In addition, NBCUniversal International chairman Jeff Shell would be appointed as chairman of the newly created Filmed Entertainment Group. Longtime studio head Ron Meyer would give up oversight of the film studio and appointed vice chairman of NBCUniversal, providing consultation to CEO Steve Burke on all of the compan's operations. Meyer retained oversight of Universal Parks and Resorts.  Universa's multi-year film financing deal with Elliott Management expired in 2013.  In summer 2013, Universal made an agreement with Thomas Tull's Legendary Pictures to distribute their films for five years starting in 2014 (the year that Legendar's similar agreement with Warner Bros. Pictures ended).  In June 2014, Universal Partnerships took over licensing consumer products for NBC and Sprout with the expectation that all licensing would eventually be centralized within NBCUniversal.  In May 2015, Gramercy Pictures was revived by Focus Features as a genre label concentrating on action, sci-fi, and horror films.  On December 16, 2015, Amblin Partners announced that it entered into a five-year distribution deal with Universal Pictures by which the films will be distributed and marketed by either Universal or Focus Features .   In early 2016, Perfect World Pictures announced a long-term co-financing deal with Universal, representing the first time a Chinese company directly invests in a multi-year slate deal with a major U.S. studio.  On April 28, 2016, Universa's parent company, NBCUniversal, announced a $3.8 billion deal to buy DreamWorks Animation .  On August 22, 2016, the deal was completed.  Universal took over the distribution deal with DreamWorks Animation starting in 2019 with the release of How to Train Your Dragon: The Hidden World , after DreamWorks Animatio's distribution deal with 20th Century Fox ended. On February 15, 2017, Universal Pictures acquired a minority stake in Amblin Partners, strengthening the relationship between Universal and Amblin.  In December 2019, Universal Pictures entered early negotiations to distribute upcoming feature film properties based on the Lego toys. Although the original Lego Movie characters are still owned by Warner Bros. Pictures , Universal Pictures will serve as a distributor of future releases and will develop additional Lego films. The future of the already in-development films is believed to remain the same.  In June, it was announced longtime Universal International Distribution President Duncan Clark would be stepping down. He would transition to a consulting role with the studio in August and would be replaced by Veronika Kwan Vandenberg.  Units Universal Pictures International Universal International Distribution Universal Pictures Home Entertainment Universal Home Entertainment Productions Universal 1440 Entertainment DreamWorks Animation Home Entertainment Universal Sony Pictures Home Entertainment Australia (joint venture with Sony Pictures Home Entertainment ) Universal Playback Studio Distribution Services (joint venture with Warner Bros. Discovery Home Entertainment ) Focus Features Universal Pictures International Entertainment NBCUniversal Entertainment Japan Working Title Films WT 2 Productions Working Title Television Carnival Films Rede Telecine (12.5%, joint venture with Canais Globo , Walt Disney Studios , Paramount Pictures and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer ) Illumination Illumination Studios Paris Illumination Labs Moonlight DreamWorks Animation DreamWorks Animation Television DreamWorks Classics Big Idea Entertainment (in-name-only unit of DreamWorks Animation) Bullwinkle Studios (JV) Harvey Entertainment (in-name-only unit of DreamWorks Animation) DreamWorks Theatricals DreamWorks New Media DreamWorksTV DreamWorks Press OTL Releasing Back Lot Music Universal Products & Experiences United International Pictures (50%, joint venture with Paramount Global's Paramount Pictures ) Amblin Partners (minor stake)   (JV)  Amblin Entertainment Amblin Television DreamWorks Pictures Storyteller Distribution  Blumhouse Holdings, LLC (minority stake with Jason Blum and James Wan )  Blumhouse Productions Atomic Monster BH Tilt (with Neon ) BlumHansonAllen Films Blumhouse Books Blumhouse Games Blumhouse International Blumhouse Television (55%) Haunted Movies Film library Main article: Lists of Universal Pictures films In addition to its own library, Universal releases the EMKA, Ltd. catalog of 1929–1949 Paramount Pictures , owned by sister company Universal Television . Film series Highest-grossing films Universal was the first studio to have released three billion-dollar films in one year; this distinction was achieved in 2015 with Furious 7 , Jurassic World , and Minions .  ‡ Includes theatrical reissue(s). See also DreamWorks Woody Woodpecker

2024 film directed by Adil & Bilall Bad Boys: Ride or Die is a 2024 American buddy cop action comedy film starring Will Smith and Martin Lawrence . The fourth installment of the Bad Boys series of buddy cop films, and the sequel to Bad Boys for Life (2020), it was directed by Adil & Bilall and written by Chris Bremner and Will Beall . Joe Pantoliano , Vanessa Hudgens , Alexander Ludwig , Paola Núñez , Jacob Scipio , John Salley , and DJ Khaled reprise their roles from previous installments. Tasha Smith joins the cast as Theresa Burnett replacing Theresa Randle , who played the character in the last three films. The story follows Miami detectives Mike Lowrey and Marcus Burnett, who are attempting to clear the name of their late Captain, Conrad Howard, after he is falsely accused of conspiracy. Bad Boys: Ride or Die premiered at Coca-Cola Arena in Dubai on May 22, 2024, and was released in the United States on June 7. The film grossed $361 million worldwide against a production budget of $100 million, becoming the eighth-highest-grossing film of 2024 . Plot [ edit ] Four years after the death of Isabel Aretas,  MPD Detective Mike Lowrey marries his physical therapist, Christine. During the ceremony, his partner, Detective Marcus Burnett, suffers a mild heart attack and goes into a coma, where he experiences a vision of the late Captain Conrad Howard telling him it is not his time. When Marcus wakes up, he believes he cannot die. Soon after, a news report reveals that Captain Howard was tied to corruption with the drug cartels. With Captain Howar's legacy being posthumously tarnished, Mike and Marcus are determined to prove his innocence with the help of Captain Rita Secada and her new boyfriend, mayoral candidate Adam Lockwood. Mike and Marcus visit Mik's son, Armando Aretas, who is incarcerated for Howar's murder. Armando tells them that Howard was not corrupt, but knows who is, so the corrupted officials hired him and his mother to kill Howard because he was close to exposing the corruption and offers to help them identify the person responsible for Howar's murder. When the conspirators try to access Captain Howar's computer, a fail-safe, pre-recorded video is sent to Mike and Marcus, warning them of corruption within federal and state law enforcement. Howard uses the phrase "Coke bottle" as a codephrase and it is revealed that he gave information to their former hacker colleague Fletcher. They go to Fletche's club to retrieve the "files", which turns out to be a QR code hidden in wall art that unlocks a second video from Captain Howard. However, assassins hired by the conspirators tail them to the club and kill Fletcher. Meanwhile, Armando is attacked by several of the conspirators disguised as prisoners, but he fends them all. Mike and Marcus arranged for Armando to be air-lifted to a more secure location in Miami. However, the conspirators sneak on board and kill the pilot and guards, causing the helicopter to crash. Mike, Marcus, and Armando survived but are branded as wanted fugitives by the conspirators. When the conspirators put out a bounty, the three are hunted by both law enforcement and opportunistic criminals. Conra's daughter, U.S. Marshal Judy Howard, swears vengeance on Armando for killing her father. With the assistance of AMMO, Mike, Marcus, and Armando, along with AMMO members Dorn and Kelly, uncover the video clues behind the murder and setup. Armando identifies the man who hired him to kill Captain Howard as James McGrath, a former Army Ranger turned DEA agent. While undercover, McGrath got captured by the cartel and was tortured until he gave up his associates and has been working with them ever since. McGrath orchestrates the kidnapping of Christine and Callie, Jud's daughter. He then sends his men to get Marcu' family, but his Marine son-in-law, Reggie, single-handedly kills them all. Rita, Dorn, and Kelly apprehend Lockwood after he is exposed to be working with McGrath. Using Lockwood as bait, the team engages in a fierce gunfight with McGrat's men at a former alligator-themed amusement park to rescue Christine and Callie, where Lockwood is devoured by an alligator after he attempts to double-cross the team. Mike confronts McGrath, who holds both Christine and Marcus hostage at gunpoint. McGrath then presents Mike with an ultimatum: he must pick either Christine or Marcus to die. Mike, alluding to Marcu' newfound belief that he "cannot die", shoots Marcus in his bulletproof vest. The chaos allows Christine and Marcus to break free before Mike shoots McGrath dead. Amidst the chaos, Judy finds Armando and prepares to kill him, but Callie appears and tells her mother that Armando saved her life. Begrudgingly grateful for his heroic act, Judy shows mercy to Armando and allows him to escape. After they and Howard are cleared of all charges and the corruption is exposed, Mike and Marcus celebrate by cooking food on a public grill with Reggie. Cast [ edit ] Will Smith as Det. Lt. Michael Eugene "Mike" Lowrey, Marcu' partner/best friend. Martin Lawrence as Det. Lt. Marcus Miles Burnett, Mik's partner/best friend. Vanessa Hudgens as Kelly, a weapons expert of AMMO  Alexander Ludwig as Dorn, a tech expert of AMMO Paola Núñez as Rita Secada, Miami P's captain and Mik's ex-girlfriend, now dating Adam Lockwood Eric Dane as James McGrath, a former U.S. Army Ranger who turned criminal after being captured and tortured by the Cartel  Ioan Gruffudd as Adam Lockwood, a district attorney and Rit's romantic partner, seeking to become the next mayor of Miami Jacob Scipio as Armando Aretas, Mik's illegitimate son and former Cartel assassin Melanie Liburd as Christine Lowrey, Mik's new wife Tasha Smith as Theresa Burnett, Marcu' wife; Smith replaces Theresa Randle , who portrayed the character in previous films Tiffany Haddish as Tabitha  Joe Pantoliano as Captain Conrad Howard. The character was previously killed by Armando, but appears both via video footage, and via a near-death ghostly vision had by Marcus.  John Salley as Fletcher, a paroled hacker DJ Khaled as Manny the Butcher Rhea Seehorn as Judy Howard, a U.S. Marshal , Conrad Howar's daughter and Calli's mother, who is hunting down Mike and Marcus Dennis McDonald as Reggie, Marcu' son-in-law and a U.S. Marine Master Sergeant Bianca Bethune as Megan Burnett, Marcu' daughter and Reggi's wife Quinn Hemphill as Callie Howard, Conrad Howar's granddaughter and Jud's daughter Jason Davis as Agent Grice, an FBI agent Derek Russo  as Lintz, McGrat's second-in-command Joyner Lucas as a gang leader Jenna Kanell as Nicole, McGrat's hacker Khaby Lame as himself Michael Bay , who directed the first two installments, makes a cameo appearance as a Porsche driver, after previously cameoing in the second two installments. Production [ edit ] Development [ edit ] Following the opening weekend box-office success of Bad Boys for Life (2020), Sony announced plans for a fourth installment, with Chris Bremner returning to write the script.   In April 2022, it was reported that development for the fourth film was being put on hold in light of the incident with Will Smith slapping Chris Rock at the 2022 Academy Awards ceremony. However, the following month Sony head chairman Tom Rothman confirmed the fourth film was still in development, despite the previous report.   In February 2023, Smith announced that he and Lawrence would reprise their roles for the film, which was in pre-production, with Adil & Bilall returning to direct.   In March 2023, it was revealed that Vanessa Hudgens would reprise her role as Kelly from Bad Boys for Life .  In April 2023, it was announced that Eric Dane had been cast, reportedly as the villain, and that Paola Núñez and Alexander Ludwig would also reprise their roles from Bad Boys for Life .  The same month, Ioan Gruffudd joined the cast.  In May 2023, it was announced that Rhea Seehorn had joined the cast.  Bad Boys: Ride or Die was originally the working title by co-director Adil El Arbi, before it was confirmed in early 2024.  Filming [ edit ] Principal photography began on April 3, 2023, in Atlanta , Georgia and Miami , Florida.   On May 22, 2023, TMZ released behind the scenes clips of Will Smith and Martin Lawrence filming scenes of the movie in Atlanta.  Filming was suspended in July due to the 2023 SAG-AFTRA strike .  In March 2024, it was revealed that Jacob Scipio would reprise his role as Armando Aretas from the previous film.  Filming wrapped on March 4.  Post-production [ edit ] Asaf Eisenberg and Dan Lebental served as editors on the film.  Lorne Balfe , who composed Bad Boys for Life , has returned to compose the fourth film. Sony Classical has released the soundtrack, coinciding with the fil's release date. Music [ edit ] The soundtrack for the film was released by Epic Records on June 7, 2024, featuring its lead single, Black Eyed Peas and El Alfa ’s " Tonight ", featuring Becky G . Several artists were also featured on it, including Sean Paul , Flo Milli , Bia , Myke Towers , Shenseea and JID , among others. Track listing: " Tonight " - Black Eyed Peas and El Alfa featuring Becky G "Lights Out" - Bia and JID "Mike T" - ScarLip "Oh No" - Bia "Duh" - Flo Milli "Bam Bam" - Shenseea and Myke Towers "Brand New" - 21 Lil Harold "Flores Pa Ti" - Becky G, Luísa Sonza and Papatinho "Light Em Up" - Will Smith and Sean Paul "Bad Boys" - Sean Paul and Trueno Marketing [ edit ] The first trailer of the film was released on March 26, 2024.  The final trailer for the film was released on May 16.  On May 28, Jimmy Butler of the Miami Heat and Lionel Messi of Inter Miami featured in another trailer.  Release [ edit ] The world premiere of Bad Boys: Ride or Die was held at Coca-Cola Arena in Dubai , United Arab Emirates, on May 22, 2024,   and it was released in the United States on June 7, 2024. It was originally scheduled to be released on July 3, 2019,  but was moved up to May 24, 2019,  before being pulled from the schedule. In July 2023, it was announced that the film would be released on June 14, 2024.  In February 2024, the release date was moved up a week to June 7.   Reception [ edit ] Box office [ edit ] As of July 8, 2024  , Bad Boys: Ride or Die has grossed $178.2 million in the United States and Canada, and $183.7 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $361.8 million,   becoming the eighth-highest-grossing film of 2024 .  In the United States and Canada, Ride or Die was released alongside The Watchers , and was initially projected to gross around $40 million from 3,850 theaters in its opening weekend.  After making $21 million on its first day, including $5.88 million from Thursday night previews, weekend estimates were raised to $52 million. It went on to debut to $56.5 million, topping the box office.  72% of opening weekend tickets were sold day-of, while 50% of the audience was under 35, with 44% being Black, 26% Hispanic and Latino, 18% Caucasian, and 12% Asian American/other.  In its sophomore weekend the film made $33 million (an "amazing" drop of just 42%, the best of the series), finishing in second behind newcomer Inside Out 2 .  Critical response [ edit ] On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , 64% of 231 critic' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 5.9/10. The websit's consensus reads: "Will Smith and Martin Lawrence remain good company even when Bad Boys strains to up the ante, proving ther's still life left in this high-octane franchise."  Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned the film a score of 54 out of 100, based on 50 critics, indicating "mixed or average" reviews.  Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A–" on an A+ to F scale, making the film the first installment in the series not to earn an A.  PostTrak reported a 90% overall positive score, with 84% saying they would definitely recommend it.  The BBC was more mixed, stating, "Critics are sometimes told that we should't analyse Hollywood blockbusters, we should just switch off our brains and enjoy them. Well, not many films are as dependent on our brains being on standby as Bad Boys: Ride or Die . The plot is nonsensical, the grenade-dodging stunts are even more nonsensical, and the internal logic is non-existent: the assertion that Marcus has to avoid stressful situations after his heart attack is forgotten within 30 seconds. But the film is fun enough in its chaotic, grungy, rough and ready way."  Possible sequel [ edit ] On June 7, 2024, Smith and Lawrence told Entertainment Weekly that they would be open to return for a fifth film in the franchise, as long as the younger cast members do more stunts and ther's a story involving their characters worth being told, with Lawrence also noting it would depend on whether the fans demanded more films.  On June 11, 2024, producer Jerry Bruckheimer noted that there had been discussions for a fifth Bad Boys film, but they are primarily waiting to see how Bad Boys: Ride or Die performs at the box office.

American television and film studio Sony Pictures Entertainment Inc. (commonly known as Sony Pictures or SPE , and formerly known as Columbia Pictures Entertainment, Inc. ) is an American diversified multinational mass media and entertainment studio conglomerate that produces, acquires, and distributes filmed entertainment (theatrical motion pictures, television programs, and recorded videos) through multiple platforms. Through an intermediate holding company called Sony Film Holding Inc., it is operated as a subsidiary of Sony Entertainment Inc. , which is itself a subsidiary of the multinational technology and media conglomerate Sony Group Corporation .   Based at the Sony Pictures Studios lot in Culver City, California as one of the "Big Five" major American film studios , it encompasses Son's motion picture , television production and distribution units. All of SP's divisions are members of the Motion Picture Association (MPA).  Son's film franchises include The Karate Kid , Ghostbusters , Jumanji , Men in Black , Spider-Man , and Son's Spider-Man Universe . History [ edit ] 1987–1989 [ edit ] On September 1, 1987, The Coca-Cola Company announced plans to spin off Columbia Pictures , which it had owned since 1982. Under this arrangement, Coca-Cola would sell its entertainment assets (Coca-Col's Entertainment Business Sector) to TriStar Pictures , of which it owned 39.6%. Tri-Star would be renamed Columbia Pictures Entertainment, Inc. (CPE), with Coca-Cola owning 49%, its shareholders owning 31%, and Tri-Sta's shareholders owning 20%.   As part of a merger plan, the two television businesses, comprising Columbia/Embassy Television and Tri-Star Television , merged altogether to form a new incarnation of the original Columbia Pictures Television .  The merger enabled three top Tri-Star executives, namely Arnold Messner, who ran Tri-Star Telecommunications , Victor A. Kaufman, who ran the main Tri-Star Pictures studio, and Scott Siegler , who ran Tri-Star Television to stay on, while four of the Coca-Cola Entertainment Business Sector departed, namely Barbara Corday , who ran Columbia / Embassy Television as president, Herman Rush and Peter Seale, who ran Coca-Cola Telecommunications , and Brian McGrath, who was the president of the Coca-Cola Entertainment Business Sector.  In early December 1987, former Coke EBS vice president Kenneth Lemberger exited the post to join Tri-Star Pictures , displacing Roger Faxon, who had joined Columbia Pictures as senior vice president of the studio.  The merger was approved by shareholders on December 15, 1987, and it was completed two days later. Columbia and Tri-Star brands would be used as separate and autonomous production entities, and would be part of CPE whole, along with the prior assets, units and commitments of the former Coca-Cola Entertainment Business Sector, which included all feature, TV, home video, and pay cable operations as well as the Entertainment Secto's feature production deal with Nelson Entertainment and its investment in Castle Rock Entertainment , and TeleVentures ; a company it continues to own, which was linked to three independent companies: Tri-Star Pictures , Stephen J. Cannell Productions and Witt/Thomas Productions . Merv Griffin Enterprises continue to function as a separate operation.  A new company was formed in early 1988 with the Tri-Star name to take over the studi's operations.  In early January 1988, CPE announced that they would revive the Triumph branding for the new worldwide subsidiary, Triumph Releasing Corporation , which was functioned as a theatrical distributor, marketing and promotion for Columbia and Tri-Star films, and named Patrick N. Williamson as president of the unit and the company provided administrative services related to distribution of its films in North America, while internationally, would be responsible for the direction of each studio.  On September 28, 1989, Sony obtained an option to purchase all of The Coca-Cola Company's stock (approximately 54 million shares or 49% of the outstanding shares) in CPE for $27 per share.  The next day, Sony also announced that it reached an agreement with Guber-Peters Entertainment Company, Inc. (NASDAQ: GPEC; formerly Barris Industries , Inc.) to acquire CPE for $200 million when Sony hired Peter Guber and Jon Peters to be its co-chairmen.  This was all led by Norio Ohga , who was the president and CEO of Sony during that time.  The hiring of Guber and Peters by Sony to run Columbia was conflicted by a previous contract the producers had signed at Warner Bros. Time Warner's chairman, Steve Ross , threatened Sony with a lawsuit for breach of contract . The lawsuit would be subsequently dropped when Sony sold half-interest in Columbia House and cable distribution rights to Columbi's feature films, TV movies, and miniseries to Warner Bros. That same agreement also saw Columbia sell its 35% interest in the Burbank Studios and acquired Lorimar Studios , previously the MGM lot, from Warner Bros.   On October 31, 1989, Sony completed a friendly takeover bid for the rest of shares (51%) of CPE, which was a public company listed on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE: KPE), and acquired 99.3% of the common stock of the company. On November 8, 1989, Sony completed the acquisition by a "short-form" merger of its wholly owned subsidiary Sony Columbia Acquisition Corporation into CPE under the Delaware General Corporation Law . Sony also completed a tender offer for shares of common stock of the Guber-Peters Entertainment Company on November 6, 1989, and acquired the company 3 days later. The acquisition cost Sony $4.9 billion ($3.55 billion for shares and $1.4 billion of long-term debt) and was backed (financed) by five major Japanese banks Mitsui , Tokyo , Fuji , Mitsubishi and Industrial Bank of Japan .    1990–1999 [ edit ] The company was renamed as Sony Pictures Entertainment on August 7, 1991.   Also that year, Jon Peters left Columbia to start Peters Entertainment with a three-year exclusive production agreement at the studio at first, before transitioning to a non-exclusive deal at the studio.  Longtime CPE employee Laurie MacDonald also left to start Aerial Pictures at the studio, first for a two-year deal, before going to 20th Century Fox in 1993, and being swallowed up by Amblin Entertainment later that year, eventually setting up DreamWorks .  Sony has since created numerous other film production and distribution units, such as creating Sony Pictures Classics for art-house fare, by forming Columbia TriStar Pictures (also known as the Columbia TriStar Motion Picture Group) by merging Columbia Pictures and TriStar Pictures in 1998, revitalizing Columbi's former television division Screen Gems. This in effect re-united the MGM studio name, with the MGM main studio lot, although somewhat confusingly, the bulk of the pre-May 1986 original MGM library ended up at Time Warner via the Ted Turner - Kirk Kerkorian " Turner Entertainment Co. " transactions. The post-April 1986 MGM library consists of acquisitions of various third-party libraries, such as the Orion Pictures catalogue, leading to MG's 2014 remake of RoboCop . 2000–2009 [ edit ] In July 2000, a marketing executive working for Sony Corporation created a fictitious film critic, David Manning , who gave consistently good reviews for releases from Sony subsidiary Columbia Pictures that generally received poor reviews amongst real critics.  Sony later pulled the ads, suspended Mannin's creator and his supervisor and paid fines to the state of Connecticut  and to fans who saw the reviewed films in the US.  It expanded its operations on April 8, 2005, when a Sony-led consortium acquired the legendary Hollywood studio Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM), in a US$4.8 billion leveraged buyout , through the holding company MGM Holdings Inc.    On June 4, 2008, SP's wholly owned group 2JS Productions B.V. acquired Dutch production company 2waytraffic N.V., famous for Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? , acquired from the original production company Celador, and You Are What You Eat for £114.3 million ($223.2 million in US dollars). 2010–2019 [ edit ] In 2011, the Sony Pictures computer network was breached and approximately one million user accounts associated with the SonyPictures.com website were leaked.  On November 18, 2012, Sony Pictures announced it has passed $4 billion with the success of releases: Skyfall , The Amazing Spider-Man , 21 Jump Street , Men in Black 3 , Hotel Transylvania , Underworld: Awakening , The Vow , and Resident Evil: Retribution .  On November 21, 2013, SPE and Sony Entertainmen's CEO Michael Lynton announced that SPE will shift emphasis from movies to television by cutting its 2014 film slate.     It was also announced on the same day, that there would be more Spider-Man sequels and spin-offs,  though on February 10, 2015, Sony Pictures eventually signed a deal with Disney's Marvel Studios to allow Spider-Man to appear in the Marvel Cinematic Universe , beginning with Captain America: Civil War , before appearing in Spider-Man: Homecoming which was released on July 7, 2017.  The deal also allowed Sony to distribute and have creative control on any MCU film where Spider-Man is the main character (such as Homecoming and its sequel Spider-Man: Far From Home ), while Disney would distribute MCU films where Spider-Man appears without being the main character. On January 22, 2014, SPE folded its technology unit into the various cores of its businesses.  In April, Sony Pictures arranged a film financing deal worth $200 million with LStar Capital , the credit venture of Lone Star Capital and Citibank , half in debt and the other in equity to fund most of SP's film slate for several years. SPE was originally considering a $300 million deal with Blue Anchor Entertainment, led by Bloom Hergott partner John LaViolette and former investment banker & producer Joseph M. Singer, and backed by Longhorn Capital Management and Deutsche Bank, which was held up by regulatory matters.  In November 2019, Sony purchased the remaining 42% stake in GSN from AT&T , placing it under the direction of its television division.  2020–present [ edit ] In April 2021, Sony signed a first-look deal with Netflix , allowing the streaming service to host their films following their theatrical runs and home media releases.  That same month, the company also entered into a multi-year licensing agreement with The Walt Disney Company for its films to stream across Disne's streaming and linear platforms, including Disney+ and Hulu .  In February 2022, Sony signed a deal with WarnerMedia Europe to stream its theatrical films on HBO Max for Central and Eastern Europe countries.  On November 28, 2022, it was announced that Legendary Entertainment reached a distribution deal with Sony to distribute its future slate of films. However, this deal does not include the Dune and MonsterVerse films as they will remain at Warner Bros. The deal came after the negative impact of the merger of Warner Bros' parent company WarnerMedia with Discovery, Inc. to form Warner Bros. Discovery .  On November 14, 2023, Sony Pictures unveiled a special centennial anniversary logo for its Columbia Pictures unit ahead of its 100th anniversary of its founding on January 10, 2024.  On April 18, 2024, it was reported that Sony was interested in acquiring Paramount Global through a joint buyout with Apollo Global Management .   Sony and Apollo submitted a $26 billion all-cash offer to acquire Paramount Global on May 2, 2024.  A special committee of Paramount’s board of directors met on May 5, 2024, and signed off on beginning deal talks with Sony and Apollo.  On June 12, 2024, Sony Pictures acquired Alamo Drafthouse Cinema for a sum which are yet-to-be disclosed. This marked the first time in more than 75 years that a major Hollywood studio would own a theater chain, as the 1948 federal ruling from United States v. Paramount Pictures, Inc. prevented them from owning exhibition companies until 2020.   Alamo Drafthouse will continue to operate their film festival Fantastic Fest , which is included in the acquisition.  2014 hack [ edit ] Main article: 2014 Sony Pictures hack In November 2014, the Sony Pictures computer network was compromised by a group of hackers named Guardians of Peace , disabling many computers.  Later the same week, five of Sony Picture' movies were leaked, including some not yet released (such as Fury and Annie ), as well as confidential data about 47,000 current and former Sony employees.    Film historian Wheeler Winston Dixon suggested that the hack, which exposed the inner workings of the studio, was "not a pretty picture," and served as a "wake-up call to the entire industry."  The hack also revealed some other documents, emails between Hollywood moguls referring to Barack Obama's cinematic tastes, a possible partnership with Marvel Studios for the inclusion of the superhero Spider-Man in Captain America: Civil War , which was later confirmed in February 2015, amongst others.   On December 16, the hackers issued a warning to moviegoers, threatening to attack anyone who sees The Interview during the holidays and urging people to "remember the 11th of September 2001 ".  On December 17, 2014, Sony cancelled the previously planned December 25 release of The Interview in response to hacker threats.  On February 24, 2015, Tom Rothman was named chairman of SP's motion picture group to replace Amy Pascal .   On April 16, 2015, WikiLeaks published over 30,287 documents, 173 e-mails, and 2,200 corporate e-mail addresses of Sony Picture' employees. WikiLeaks said in a press release that the content of the leaks were "newsworthy and at the center of a geo-political conflict" and belonged "in the public domain". Sony Pictures later condemned the hack and subsequent leaks, calling it a "malicious criminal act", while also criticizing WikiLeaks for describing the leaked content as public domain .    Seth Rogen has expressed doubts about North Korea being responsible for the 2014 Sony hack. Based on the timeline of events and the amount of information hacked, he believes the hack may have been conducted by a Sony employee.  Sale of headquarters [ edit ] Sony Pictures Plaza in 2008 In 2014, the eight-story, 260,000sq ft building originally designed by architect Maxwell Starkman and known as Sony Pictures Plaza, which was originally the headquarters of MGM Studios and later Sony Pictures Studios, was sold to Runyon Group and fellow developer LBA Realty for $159 million.  Corporate structure [ edit ] Headquartered in Culver City, California , U.S., SPE comprises various studios and entertainment brands, including Affirm Films , Columbia Pictures , Screen Gems , Sony Pictures Classics , TriStar Pictures , Crunchyroll , Game Show Network and Alamo Drafthouse Cinema Senior management team [ edit ] Tony Vinciquerra Chairman and CEO, Sony Pictures Entertainment Stacy Green Executive Vice President & Chief People Officer, Sony Pictures Entertainment Philip Rowley Senior Executive Vice President & Chief Financial Officer, Sony Pictures Entertainment Tom Rothman Chairman, Sony Pictures Motion Picture Group  Katherine Pope President, Sony Pictures Television Studios Michael Kustermann CEO, Sony Pictures Experiences and Alamo Drafthouse Cinema Motion Picture Group [ edit ] Sony Pictures Motion Picture Group (SPMPG):  Formerly Columbia TriStar Motion Picture Group. With a library of more than 4,000 films (including 12 Academy Award for Best Picture winners), as of 2004 this unit of Sony distributes about 22 films a year under its various studio brands in 67 countries.  The group owns studio facilities in the United States, Hong Kong, Madrid , Mexico, the United Kingdom, Brazil and Japan. Columbia Pictures : Founded in 1924 by Harry Cohn , Sony acquired the studio in 1989 from The Coca-Cola Company for $3.4 billion.   Ghost Corps : Oversees projects relating to the Ghostbusters franchise, including films, television shows, and merchandising. TriStar Pictures : Formed in 1982 as a joint venture between Columbia Pictures, HBO , and CBS . Became part of Columbia Pictures Entertainment in December 1987 and the Sony ownership in 1989. Was relaunched in 2004 as a marketing and acquisitions unit that specializes in the genre and independent films. TriStar Productions : A film and television production company which is a joint-venture between Tom Rothman and SPE. Screen Gems : Originally Columbi's animation division and later a television production company best known for T's Bewitched and The Partridge Family , as well as bringing The Three Stooges short subjects to TV in 1958. Sony revived the Screen Gems brand in 1998 to develop mid-priced movies (production budget of between $20 million and $50 million) in specific genres such as science fiction, horror , black cinema and franchise films. Scream Gems: A short film specialty label of Screen Gems. Sony Pictures Imageworks : Founded in 1992, it is Son's in-house visual effects and computer animation studio.  Sony Pictures Animation : Founded in 2002, it is Son's animation studio that produces animated feature films as well as animated television series. Sony Pictures Classics : Founded in 1992, it is Son's specialty film label that distributes, produces and acquires films such as documentaries , independent and arthouse films in the United States and internationally. 3000 Pictures: A production company that was launched in July 2019 by Elizabeth Gabler, former Fox 2000 Pictures president, who henced the name. This is a joint venture between Sony Pictures Entertainment and HarperCollins , producing HarperCollins adaptations. Sony Pictures Releasing : Founded in 1994  as a successor to Triumph Releasing Corporation. The unit handles distribution, marketing, and promotion for films produced by Sony Pictures Entertainment; including Columbia Pictures, TriStar Pictures, Screen Gems, Sony Pictures Classics, among others. 1 Sony Pictures Releasing International: Formerly known as Columbia TriStar Film Distributors International. It is the international arm of Sony Pictures Releasing. Sony Pictures India: A production house established by Sony to release Indian movies and distribute Hollywood movies released under Columbia Pictures. Sony Pictures International Productions: A division that produces films in local languages other than English around the world. Sony Pictures Worldwide Acquisitions (SPWA): Formerly Worldwide SPE Acquisitions, Inc. A Sony division which acquires and produces about 60 films per year for a wide variety of distribution platforms, especially for non-theatrical markets. Destination Films : A motion picture company which currently specializes in action, thriller, sci-fi, niche and low-end to medium-end horror films was purchased by Sony in 2001. Stage 6 Films : A direct-to-video label created in 2007. Also releases some films theatrically. Affirm Films : A motion picture label launched in 2007 to release gospel and Christian films. Great American Pure Flix : Launched as Pure Flix in 2015. A streaming service which is a joint venture between Affirm Films and Great American Media . Home Entertainment [ edit ] Sony Pictures Home Entertainment : Founded in 1978 as Columbia Pictures Home Entertainment. Currently manufactures and distributes the Sony film and television libraries on Blu-ray , Ultra HD Blu-ray , 3D Blu-ray , DVD , and digital download . Sony Pictures Kids Zone : Formerly known as Sony Kid' Music/Video, Sony Wonder and Sony Pictures Family Fun. The former music and video label of Sony Music Entertainment and later Sony BMG , it became the kids and family entertainment label of SPHE in 2007. Kartoon Studios (minority stake) A Squared Entertainment LLC Genius Brands Music Kartoon Channel Stan Lee Comics LLC: A comic book publishing and licensing company which is a joint venture between Kartoon Studios and POW! Entertainment . Stan Lee Universe: A joint venture between Kartoon Studios and POW! Entertainment managing the likeness and IPs of comic book writer and publisher Stan Lee . Wow Unlimited Media Ezrin Hirsh Entertainment: A joint venture between Bob Ezrin and Michael Hirsh . Mainframe Studios : Formerly known as Mainframe Entertainment, Rainmaker Entertainment and Rainmaker Studios, it is a Canadian animation studio founded in 1993 best known for producing ReBoot , Beast Wars: Transformers and the Barbie direct-to-video film series . Frederator Networks Channel Frederator Network Cartoon Hangover Átomo Network: A multi-channel network which is a joint venture between Frederator Networks and Ánima . Cinematica Frederator Digital Frederator Studios : Founded in 1997, it is best known for producing The Fairly OddParents , Adventure Time , Bravest Warriors , Bee and PuppyCat and Castlevania . The Leaderboard Network Television Group [ edit ] U.S. production and distribution [ edit ] Sony Pictures Television : (formerly Columbia TriStar Television Group) The successor-in-interest to Columbi's television division (first Screen Gems, later Columbia Pictures Television , TriStar Television , and Columbia TriStar Television ), as of 2004 the unit was producing 60 titles for various television outlets globally. Contains a library that includes more than 35,000 episodes of more than 270 television series and 22,000 game show episodes under the Sony Pictures Television brand, and the television rights to the Embassy Pictures library (including The Graduate and The Lion in Winter ) and also the owner of the television division " Embassy Television "—among most recent notable shows in this library are Party of Five , The Shield , Seinfeld , The King of Queens , Days of Our Lives and The Young and the Restless . Their former international distribution division, Sony Pictures Television International, was responsible for global distribution for the SPE film and television properties worldwide. Formerly known as Columbia TriStar International Television from 1992 to 2002. Affirm Television: Affirm Film's television division.  Embassy Row : A television and digital production company founded in 2005 by Michael Davies . SPT acquired the company on January 14, 2009. Sony Pictures Television Game Show (SPTGS): The game show production division of SPT formed in 2022. Califon Productions: The production company responsible for Wheel of Fortune . Jeopardy Productions: The production company responsible for Jeopardy! . Sony Pictures Television Music Development (SPTMD): The music development division of SPT formed in 2023. Sony Pictures Television Nonfiction (SPTN): Founded as CKX, Inc. in 2005. With a library of more than 100 series broadcast in over 35 countries as of 2023, this unit produces nonfiction and documentary programming. SPT acquired the company in 2022.  Formerly CORE Media Group, Inc. and Industrial Media, LLC. 19 Entertainment : A television production company founded by Simon Fuller in 1985 known for producing the So You Think You Can Dance and Idol franchises. 19 Recordings : The music division of 19 Entertainment. B17 Entertainment: A television production company founded by Rhett Bachner and Brien Meagher in 2013. House of NonFiction: A television production company founded by Alex Stapleton in 2021. Maxine: A television production company founded by Mary Robertson in 2022. Sharp Entertainment : A television production company founded by Matt Sharp in 2003. The Intellectual Property Corporation : A television production company founded by Eli Holzman and Aaron Saidman in 2016. This Machine Filmworks: A film and television production company founded by R. J. Cutler in 2020. Trilogy Films: A film and television production company founded by Dawn Porter . UNConventional Entertainment: A television production company founded by Gena McCarthy in 2023. Sony Pictures Television Studios: A production name launched on July 25, 2017, to carry out the SPT library, starting on January 7, 2020.  International production [ edit ] Bad Wolf : Founded by Julie Gardner and Jane Tranter in 2015. SPT acquired the company in 2021.   Blueprint Television : SPT acquired a minority stake in 2016. Curio Pictures : Formerly Playmaker Media. An Australian production company founded in 2009 by David Taylor and David Maher. SPT acquired the company in 2014.  Eleven : Founded by Jamie Campbell and Joel Wilson in 2006. SPT acquired the company in 2020. Eleventh Hour Films: SPT acquired the company in 2018. Fable Pictures Floresta Huaso: A Chinese joint venture production company launched in 2004 by Sony Pictures Television International and Hua Long Film Digital Production Co., Ltd. of the China Film Group in Beijing .  Human Media Left Bank Pictures : A British production company founded by Andy Harries , Francis Hopkinson, and Marigo Kehoe in 2007. Majority stake acquired by SPT in 2012 and then full control in 2022. Palladium Fiction Satisfy: A joint venture with Satisfaction Group for France, with SPT holding a 20% stake in the company. Sony Pictures Television Kids (SPTK): Founded as Silvergate Media in 2011. The company is best known for the animated series Hilda and Octonauts . SPT acquired the company in 2019. Stolen Picture : Founded by Simon Pegg and Nick Frost in 2016. SPT acquired a minority stake in the company in 2017. Stellify Media : A joint venture between SPT, Kieran Doherty, and Matt Worthy launched in 2014 for Northern Ireland.  Teleset : Founded in 1995. SPT acquired the company in 2009. Toro Media The Whisper Group: SPT acquired a minority stake in the company in 2020.  Sony Pictures Television Networks [ edit ] United States [ edit ] Game Show Network, LLC Game Show Network (GSN): A basic cable channel launched in 1994 broadcasting game shows. Game Show Central : A free ad-supported streaming television network broadcasting archived original programming from the GSN network. Crunchyroll Channel : A free ad-supported streaming television network launched in 2023 broadcasting anime managed as a joint venture with Sony Pictures and Sony Music Entertainment Japan -owned Aniplex's Crunchyroll, LLC . CPE US Networks, Inc. Get : A digital multicast network broadcasting classic programming from the 1960s through the 2000s. Sony Cine: A Spanish-language cable channel. Sony Movie Channel : A cable channel launched in 2010 broadcasting films from the SPE library as well as from other distributors. International [ edit ] AXN : A general entertainment television network launched in 1997 which airs across Asia, Latin America and Europe. Sony Channel : A brand of general entertainment channels. Sony Entertainment Television : An Indian Hindi-language general entertainment pay television channel launched in 1995. Other Sony Pictures operations [ edit ] Columbia TriStar Marketing Group (CTMG) Crunchyroll, LLC : A distributor of anime series and films managed as a joint venture with Sony Music Entertainment Japan's Aniplex . Crunchyroll : The eponymous streaming service launched in 2006. Crunchyroll UK and Ireland : Founded as Golden Square Music in 1987. The British division of Crunchyroll, LLC. Formerly Island World Communications, Manga Entertainment and Funimation UK and Ireland. Crunchyroll Store Australia : Founded as Madman Anime in 2016. The Australian division of Crunchyroll, LLC. Crunchyroll EMEA : Founded as Viz Media Europe in 2007. The division of Crunchyroll, LLC that serves Africa, the Middle East and non-English speaking Europe. Crunchyroll SAS: The French division of Crunchyroll EMEA. Crunchyroll SA: The Swiss division of Crunchyroll EMEA. Crunchyroll GmbH: The German division of Crunchyroll EMEA. Crunchyroll Games: The gaming division of Crunchyroll, LLC. Crunchyroll Store : An anime distributor and online shop. Crunchyroll Channel : A free ad-supported streaming television network launched in 2023 broadcasting anime managed as a joint venture with Sony Pictures Television Networks' Game Show Network, LLC . Madison Gate Records : A music record label of SPE specializing in soundtracks and other recordings derived from feature films, television series and other media. Pixomondo (PXO): An international visual effects and virtual production studio founded in 2001 by Thilo Kuther. SPE acquired the company in 2022. Sony Pictures Consumer Products: The consumer products division of SPE. Sony Pictures Cable Ventures, Inc. Sony Pictures Europe: Offices located at 25 Golden Square, London , England Sony Pictures Family Entertainment Group (SPFEG): The family entertainment unit of SPE founded in 1999. Sony Pictures Interactive Sony Pictures Studios : The actual physical buildings, land and movie-making equipment properties in Culver City, California. Includes 22 sound stages, ranging in size from 7,600 to 43,000 square feet (700 to 4,000 m 2 ) Sony Pictures Studios Post Production Facilities Toei Animation (1.89%, co-owned with Toei Company , TV Asahi , Bandai Namco Filmworks and Fuji Media Holdings ): Founded in 1948 by Kenzō Masaoka and Zenjirō Yamamoto, it is best known for the Dragon Ball series, Sailor Moon , One Piece and Saint Seiya . Toei Audio Visual Art Center (TAVAC): The recording facility of the studio. Toei Animation Asia Pacific, Inc.: The Philippines division of the company. Toei Animation Inc. : The American division of the company. Toei Animation Enterprises Limited: The Hong Kong division of the company. Toei Animation Europe S.A.S.: The European division of the company. Toei Animation Music Publishing: The music publishing division of the company. Toei Animation Shanghai Co.: The Chinese division of the company. Worldwide Product Fulfillment Sony Pictures Experiences Alamo Drafthouse Cinema Related Sony Pictures divisions [ edit ] The following are other Sony Pictures divisions that are not subsidiaries of the California-based Sony Pictures Entertainment, but are instead subsidiaries of the main Tokyo-based Sony Group Corporation. Sony Pictures Entertainment Japan (SPEJ): The company plans, produces, manufactures, sells, imports, exports, leases, broadcasts and distributes movies, TV programs, videos and audio-visual software in Japan. The company website says it was established on February 10, 1984,  predating Son's acquisition of Columbia Pictures Entertainment by 5 years. SPEJ was formed in 1991 through the merger of Columbia TriStar Japan, RCA-Columbia Pictures Video Japan, and Japan International Enterprises.  Based in Tokyo, Japan. The California-based Sony Pictures Entertainment holds a majority share of SPEJ.   Madhouse (5%, joint venture with Nippon TV ) Music On! TV (co-owned with Sony Music Entertainment Japan ) Sony Pictures Digital Productions Inc. (SPDP): A subsidiary of Sony Corporation based in Japan.  Sony Station Sony Pictures Network Sony Pictures Digital Networks SPiN SoapCity Screenblast Advanced Platform Group APG Sony Pictures Networks India (SPNI): Trading as Culver Max Entertainment (CME), it is a subsidiary of Sony Group Corporation based in India.  Sony Entertainment Television and Sony SAB are its main brands. It also owns many other companies and brands under the Sony brand. Sony Aath Sony BBC Earth (joint venture with BBC Studios ) Sony Entertainment Television Sony Kal Sony Marathi Sony Max Sony Max 2 Sony Pal Sony Pictures Networks Productions Sony Pix Sony SAB Sony Six Sony Sports Network Sony Sports Ten 1 Sony Sports Ten 2 Sony Sports Ten 3 Sony Sports Ten 4 Sony Sports Ten 5 Sony Wah Sony YAY! Studio NEXT

2024 American film by Wes Ball Kingdom of the Planet of the Apes is a 2024 American science fiction action film directed by Wes Ball and written by Josh Friedman . A standalone sequel to War for the Planet of the Apes (2017), it is the fourth installment in the Planet of the Apes reboot film series and the tenth film overall. It stars Owen Teague in the lead role alongside Freya Allan , Kevin Durand , Peter Macon , and William H. Macy . The film takes place 300 years after the events of War and follows a young chimpanzee named Noa, who embarks on a journey alongside a human woman named Mae to determine the future for apes and humans alike. Development on a new Planet of the Apes film began in April 2019, following Disne's acquisition of 20th Century Fox , with Ball attached as writer and director that December. Much of the script was written during the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, with casting commencing in June 2022, following the scrip's completion. Teague was cast in the lead role that August, with the fil's title and additional casting announced in the following months. Principal photography began in October 2022 in Sydney and wrapped in February 2023.   Kingdom of the Planet of the Apes premiered at the TCL Chinese Theatre in Los Angeles on May 2, 2024, and was released by 20th Century Studios in the United States on May 10. The film received generally positive reviews from critics, and has grossed over $394 million worldwide, becoming the seventh-highest-grossing film of 2024 . Plot [ edit ] Many generations after Caesa's death,  apes have established numerous clans, while humans have become feral-esque. Noa, a young chimpanzee from a falconry-like practicing clan, prepares for a coming-of-age ceremony by collecting eagle eggs with his friends Anaya and Soona. However, a human scavenger follows Noa home and inadvertently cracks his egg during a scuffle before fleeing. While searching for a replacement egg, Noa encounters a group of ape raiders using electric weapons. As Noa hides from them, the apes follow his horse back to his clan. Noa hurries home to find his village burning; the gorilla general Sylva kills his father, Koro, before dropping Noa from a high platform. Left for dead, Noa awakens from the ashes, discovering that his clan has been abducted. He buries Koro and sets out to rescue his clan. Noa is joined by Raka, an orangutan who tells Noa about Caesa's teachings. The apes notice they are being followed by the human scavenger; Raka offers her food and a blanket, naming her Nova. When the trio encounters a group of feral humans, Sylv's raiders suddenly attack them. Noa and Raka rescue Nova who, to their surprise, can speak. She reveals that her name is Mae and that the raiders took No's clan to a beachfront settlement outside an old human vault. As they cross a bridge on their way to the settlement, they are ambushed by Sylva. In the ensuing fight, Raka saves Mae from drowning but is swept away  by the rapids. Noa and Mae are captured and taken to the ape' settlement. Noa reunites with his clan and is introduced to the ape' self-proclaimed king, Proximus Caesar. Proximus has enslaved other clans, forcing them to work on opening the vault so he can access the human technology locked inside. Proximus invites Noa to dinner along with Mae and Trevathan, a human prisoner who is teaching Proximus about the old human world. Proximus believes that No's intelligence could help open the vault and warns him that Mae only has her own agenda. Noa confronts Mae, demanding the truth in exchange for his help. Mae discloses knowledge of a hidden entrance to the vault and must retrieve a mysterious "book" capable of restoring speech to humanity inside. Noa agrees to help her enter the vault. Noa, Mae, Soona, and Anaya secretly plant explosives around the strong walls that surround the settlement. Trevathan catches them and intends to warn Proximus, but Mae strangles him to death. The group enters the vault, finding a stockpile of weapons and Ma's "book", which is actually a satellite deciphering key. The apes discover childre's picture books depicting humans as the once-dominant species and apes in cages at a zoo. As the group makes their way out of the bunker, they are confronted by Proximus and his tribe. Lightning, one of Proximu' lieutenants, threatens to kill Soona, but Mae kills him with a gun and then triggers the explosives, flooding the bunker with the apes inside. Mae flees the settlement while the apes climb to higher ground through the bunker. Noa is pursued by Sylva but manages to trap and drown him. Noa escapes the bunker with his clan, but Proximus attacks him. Noa leads his clan in summoning their eagles to attack Proximus and send him falling off a cliff into the sea. As No's clan returns to rebuild their home, Mae arrives to bid farewell to Noa, explaining that she destroyed the bunker to prevent the apes from accessing its weapons. Noa questions whether apes and humans can co-exist peacefully given this disparity. As Noa takes Soona to look through a telescope he found on his journey, Mae travels to a human settlement at a satellite base, which is kept quarantined from the outside world. Mae delivers the decipher key, allowing the humans to reactivate the satellites and successfully contact other humans worldwide. Cast [ edit ] Apes [ edit ] Owen Teague as Noa, a young chimpanzee hunter and the heir to his ape clan led by his father Koro Kevin Durand as Proximus Caesar, an ambitious and ruthless bonobo monarch who leads a coastal clan of apes in search of human technology and preaches an altered version of Caesa's teachings    Peter Macon as Raka, a wise and virtuous Bornean orangutan who becomes an ally of Noa   Lydia Peckham  as Soona, a young female chimpanzee and No's love interest  Travis Jeffery  as Anaya, a young male chimpanzee and No's best friend  Sara Wiseman  as Dar, No's chimpanzee mother Neil Sandilands  as Koro, No's chimpanzee father and the leader of the falconry ape clan  Eka Darville as Sylva, a western lowland gorilla and chief commander of Proximu' army   Ras-Samuel Weld 'abzgi  as Lightning, a chimpanzee soldier of Proximu' army Additionally, Karin Konoval and Terry Notary appear in the prologue as Maurice and Rocket, the Bornean orangutan and chimpanzee respectively from the previous films.  Humans [ edit ] Freya Allan as Mae,  a young woman who joins Noa on his journey while having her own agenda.  She is given the name "Nova" by Noa and Raka William H. Macy as Trevathan,  an opportunistic human who styles himself as Proximus Caesa's chief advisor and teaches him human history  Dichen Lachman  as Korina, a human leader of the human satellite base Production [ edit ] Pre-production and writing [ edit ] In October 2016, Dawn of the Planet of the Apes (2014) and War for the Planet of the Apes (2017) director Matt Reeves said that he had ideas for a fourth film in the Planet of the Apes reboot series .  In mid-2017, as War was released, Reeves and co-writer Mark Bomback expressed further interest in sequels. Reeves said that Steve Zahn's character, Bad Ape, established a primate world "much larger" than just Caesa's group of apes, adding that there are apes "who grew up without the benefit of Caesa's leadership" and suggesting that conflict would arise if Caesa's apes should encounter such outsiders.  Bomback felt that "there was probably only one more big chapter left to tell", explaining how Caesar "came to be this Moses figure in the Apes world". He suggested that other filmmakers might work on the sequel and that it could take place hundreds of years after War . Despite this, he clarified that there had not been conversations on a potential sequel, expressing his desire to "take a breather and let things rest a bit."  In April 2019, following the Walt Disney Company's acquisition of 20th Century Fox , Walt Disney Studios announced that further Planet of the Apes films were in development.  In August, it was confirmed that any future installments would be set in the same universe first established in Rise of the Planet of the Apes (2011).  In December, it was announced that Wes Ball would write and direct the film,  after having previously worked with Reeves on a film adaptation of Mouse Guard . After that film was canceled by Disney following the merger, the studio approached Ball on developing a new Planet of the Apes film.  In February 2020, Ball confirmed that the film would not be a reboot, instead chronicling "Caesa's legacy".  Joe Hartwick Jr. and David Starke were also confirmed to serve as producers.  In April, it was announced that Peter Chernin , who produced the previous installments through Chernin Entertainment , would serve as executive producer. The film will be one of the compan's last films before it leaves 20th Century for Netflix .  The next month, it was revealed that Josh Friedman would co-write the script with Ball, and that Rick Jaffa and Amanda Silver would return to produce the film after doing so for the previous installments. Ball and Friedman would discuss the script through Zoom video calls, a routine which continued as the COVID-19 pandemic began. Instead of a direct sequel to War , Ball stated that the film would feel more like a follow-up to the previous films, and commented that the film could begin virtual production soon in spite of the pandemic due to the fact that much of the film contained computer-generated imagery (CGI).  In March 2022, 20th Century  president Steve Asbell stated that he was expecting a screenplay draft shortly, aiming for production to begin by the end of the year.  By June, Oddball Entertainment and Shinbone Productions were also set to produce the film,   while the search for the main star was underway following the scrip's completion the previous month.  The fil's title was revealed to be Kingdom of the Planet of the Apes in September 2022, with the film revealed to take place many years after the events of War . Jaffa, Silver, and Patrick Aison joined the writing team, with Ball no longer credited as screenwriter. Jason Reed and Jenno Topping were also announced as producer and executive producer, respectively, while Starke was no longer expected to serve as producer.  Ball stated the film was set during the "Dark Ages", where the apes rediscover lost items from the past in "this grand adventure"; Kingdom of the Planet of the Apes takes place 300 years following Caesa's death. He felt the protagonist Noa was neither a child nor adult, but a figure placed in "extraordinary" circumstances and living in a nomadic ape tribe. Teague also stated that Noa does't have a self-perception of identity but was inspired by Caesa's legacy and message of "apes together strong". He compared the antagonist, Proximus, to that of inventor Thomas Edison as he had rediscovered electricity , which was knowledge lost during the Dark Ages. Durand felt that the name Proximus Caesar was a self-proclaimed title, as his goal was to ensure the continued prosperity of apes despite subverting Caesa's original teachings.   He had the idea to change the timeframe after taking inspiration from the film Apocalypto (2006), as it had provided him an opportunity for a "whole new trajectory". Hartwick Jr. stated that the film was focusing on Noa exploring the world for the first time.  Ball intended for what Noa, Mae, and Soona saw through the telescope in the middle and end of the film would remain ambiguous, saying, "I figured there is nothing I could show you that would be stronger than what the audienc's imagination would conjure up...Sure, it might turn some people off, but some people will like it. I have ideas of what the're looking at...Space obviously is a key idea in all of these movies. So, maybe i's them looking to the future?"  Casting [ edit ] In August 2022, Owen Teague joined the cast of the film in the lead motion-capture role.  The next month, Freya Allan and Peter Macon joined the cast with the announcement of the fil's title and release year,  as did Eka Darville and Kevin Durand in October.   Travis Jeffery, Neil Sandilands , Sara Wiseman , Lydia Peckham and Ras-Samuel Weld 'abzgi were added to the cast later that month,  while William H. Macy and Dichen Lachman were cast in January and February 2023, respectively.   After being cast, Teague began to volunteer and study the animals at the Center for Great Apes in Florida. At first, he studied chimpanzees as a whole to see their typical day and examine how they move. However, he was drawn to a specific chimp, Bentley. It was Bentle's curious nature that made Teague resonate with him. Teague says it was Bentley that inspired how he developed the character of Noa as an actor.  Filming [ edit ] Principal photography began in October 2022 at Disney Studios Australia in Sydney, with funding partially provided by the Australian Government ,  under the working title Forbidden Zone . Filming concluded on February 15, 2023.  Ball added filming primarily occurred on location alongside using motion-capture technology.  Post-production and visual effects [ edit ] Erik Winquist served as the visual effects supervisor, with vendors including Wētā FX , which had previously done work on the prior three Planet of the Apes reboot films.  Ball stated the film did not use The Volume technology, which had previously been employed for The Mandalorian , focusing on filming on-location and using full CG. He went on to compare the fil's CG to that of James Cameron's Avatar franchise.  The team used techniques for their previous film Avatar: The Way of Water (2022) when working on an action sequence involving a human-hunt taking place on rivers. This was due to requiring the CG models of apes based on motion-capture performances to appear realistic when interacting with water.  Music [ edit ] John Paesano , who had previously collaborated with Ball on the Maze Runner film trilogy (2014–2018), composed the film score for Kingdom of the Planet of the Apes . Paesano incorporated Jerry Goldsmith's original themes from the 1968 film within the score, describing it as "the musical legacy".  The soundtrack was released by Hollywood Records on May 10, 2024.  Release [ edit ] Kingdom of the Planet of the Apes held its world premiere at the TCL Chinese Theatre in Los Angeles on May 2, 2024,  followed by an early access screening on May 8.  It was released in the United States on May 10, 2024, in both conventional theaters and in IMAX , Dolby Cinema , 4DX , and ScreenX .  The film was previously set for release on May 24,  but was rescheduled two weeks earlier to avoid competition with Furiosa: A Mad Max Saga and The Garfield Movie during Memorial Day weekend.  Marketing [ edit ] A teaser trailer was released on November 2, 2023.   Bryan Britt of Inverse compared the fil's premise to that of the original Planet of the Apes film from 1968.  A second trailer premiered during Super Bowl LVIII on February 11, 2024.   As part of a viral marketing campaign in California, actors wearing realistic ape costumes were dispatched on horseback to Venice Beach and Crissy Field in April 2024.   This campaign extended to the New York City Metropolitan area as similar actors on horseback were seen at Liberty State Park with the Manhattan skyline and Statue of Liberty in the background.  Home media [ edit ] Kingdom of the Planet of the Apes was released on premium video on demand (PVOD) on July 9, 2024 by 20th Century Studios and on Ultra HD Blu-ray and Blu-ray on August 27 by Sony Pictures Home Entertainment .  The Blu-ray editions will also include Inside The Lens: The Raw Cut , a full-length alternative cut showing the hands-on process of making the film and the actor' raw motion-capture performances before visual effects were added.   Reception [ edit ] Box office [ edit ] As of July 8, 2024  , Kingdom of the Planet of the Apes has grossed $169.7 million in the United States and Canada and $225.1 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $394.8 million.   In the United States and Canada, Kingdom of the Planet of the Apes was projected to gross $50–55 million from 4,075 theaters in its opening weekend.   The film made $22.2 million on its first day, including $6.6 million from preview screenings ($1.6 million on Wednesday and $5 million on Thursday).  It went on to debut to $58.4 million, topping the box office and marking the third-best opening weekend of the franchise behind Dawn of the Planet of the Apes ($72.6 million in 2014) and Planet of the Apes ($68.5 million in 2001).   In its second weekend, the film made $25.5 million (a drop of 56%), finishing second behind newcomer IF ,  and then came in fourth place the following weekend with $13.4 million.  Outside the U.S., Kingdom was projected to debut to $80–90 million.  It ended up making $72.7 million, for a worldwide opening of $129 million, with the largest markets being China ($11.4 million), France ($7.1 million), Mexico ($6.4 million), the United Kingdom ($4.8 million), South Korea ($3.2 million), Australia ($2.7 million), Brazil ($2.6 million), Germany ($2.2 million), and Spain ($2.2 million).  Critical response [ edit ] According to the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , critics described the film as having " Avatar -level visual effects", complemented by "standout performances and top-notch action", although "it does't quite meet the heights of its predecessors."  On the website, 80% of 306 critic' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 7/10. The sit's critics consensus reads: "Carving out a new era for The Planet of the Apes with lovable characters and rich visuals, Kingdom does't take the crown as best of the franchise but handily justifies its continued reign."  Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned the film a score of 66 out of 100, based on 57 critics, indicating "generally favorable" reviews.  Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B" on an A+ to F scale, down from the "A−" earned by the three previous films, while those polled by PostTrak gave it a 77% overall positive score.   Writing for The New York Times , critic Alissa Wilkinson called the film "uncommonly thoughtful, even insightful".  Tyler Bur of The Washington Post praised the fil's visuals, describing the computer generated primates as “breathtakingly hyper-real”. However, Bur criticized the human characters as “two-dimensional”, including Mae, who he viewed as a “plot device more than a human being”.  Clarisse Loughrey of The Independent called the film "traditional and robustly crafted, in a way that’s deferential less to the trends of today than to some half-remembered dream of Hollywood’s classical epics."  Charles Pulliam-Moore of The Verge disliked the tendency of the plot to lay the ground for "sequels down the line  than to really dig into the substance at hand".  Jake Wilson of The Age gave it 2/5 stars, writing, "Plainly, this is not a movie to be taken too seriously, but at nearly two-and-a-half hours, it’s also much too slow and ponderous to qualify as a campy good time."  A review for the BBC criticized the fact that the film repeats various elements of the precedent instalment, stating, "If you have seen War for the Planet of the Apes (2017), the final instalment of the Caesar trilogy, you might be astonished at how derivative the last stretch of Kingdom is. Once again, a ruthless leader holds apes prisoner in an abandoned weapons depot. This time everything is rusted from age and the ruler is Proximus instead of Woody Harrelso's Colonel, but still."  Accolades [ edit ] Future [ edit ] In June 2022, it was reported that Disney and 20th Century planned for Kingdom to be the first of a new trilogy of Planet of the Apes films.  Wes Ball confirmed this in December 2023, explaining that the film had been conceived as the beginning of a trilogy that "fit into the legacy of" the previous three films.  Rick Jaffa and Amanda Silver also expressed interest in making a third trilogy of films, thus bringing the total of the Planet of the Apes reboot films to nine films.

American film studio "20th Century Fox" redirects here. For other uses, see 20th Century Fox (disambiguation) . 20th Century Studios, Inc. is an American film studio owned by the Walt Disney Studios , a division of Disney Entertainment , in turn a division of The Walt Disney Company .  It is headquartered at the Fox Studio Lot in the Century City area of Los Angeles, leased from Fox Corporation .  Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures distributes and markets the films produced by 20th Century Studios in theatrical markets.   For over 80 years, 20th Century was one of the major American film studios . It was formed in 1935 as Twentieth Century-Fox Film Corporation  by the merger of Fox Film and Twentieth Century Pictures , and one of the original " Big Five " among eight majors of Hollywoo's Golden Age . In 1985, the studio removed the hyphen in the name (becoming Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation )  after being acquired by Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation , which was renamed 21st Century Fox in 2013 after it spun off its publishing assets . Disney purchased most of 21st Century Fo's assets , which included 20th Century Fox, on March 20, 2019.  The studio adopted its current name as a trade name on January 17, 2020, in order to avoid confusion with Fox Corporation, and subsequently started to use it for the copyright of 20th Century and Searchlight Pictures productions on December 4.  The most commercially successful film series from 20th Century Studios include the first six Star Wars films, X-Men , Ice Age , Avatar , and Planet of the Apes .  Additionally, the studi's library includes many individual films such as Titanic and The Sound of Music , both of which won the Academy Award for Best Picture and became the highest-grossing films of all time during their initial releases.   History From founding to 1956 See also: Fox Film and Twentieth Century Pictures Carmen Miranda as Dorita in The Gan's All Here . In 1946, she was the highest-paid actress in the United States.  Alice Faye as Baroness Cecilia Duarte, Don Ameche as Larry Martin and Baron Manuel Duarte, and Carmen Miranda as Carmen in That Night in Rio , produced by Fox in 1941 The 20th Century-Fox logo depicted in a 1939 advertisement in Boxoffice From the 1952 film Viva Zapata! Twentieth Century Pictures' Joseph Schenck and Darryl F. Zanuck left United Artists over a stock dispute, and began merger talks with the management of financially struggling Fox Film , under President Sidney Kent.   Spyros Skouras , then manager of the Fox West Coast Theaters , helped make it happen (and later became president of the new company).  The company had been struggling since founder William Fox lost control of the company in 1930.  Fox Film Corporation and Twentieth Century Pictures merged in 1935. Initially, it was speculated in The New York Times that the newly merged company would be named "Fox-Twentieth Century". The new company, Twentieth Century-Fox Film Corporation, began trading on May 31, 1935. Kent remained at the company, joining Schenck and Zanuck. Zanuck replaced Winfield Sheehan as the compan's production chief. The company established a special training school. Lynn Bari , Patricia Farr and Anne Nagel were among 14 young women "launched on the trail of film stardom" on August 6, 1935, when they each received a six-month contract with 20th Century-Fox after spending 18 months in the school. The contracts included a studio option for renewal for as long as seven years.  For many years, 20th Century Fox identified themselves as having been founded in 1915, the year Fox Film was founded. For instance, it marked 1945 as its 30th anniversary. However, it has considered the 1935 merger as its founding in recent years, even though most film historians agree it was founded in 1915.  The compan's films retained the 20th Century Pictures searchlight logo on their opening credits as well as its opening fanfare, but with the name changed to 20th Century-Fox. After the merger was completed, Zanuck signed young actors to help carry 20th Century-Fox: Tyrone Power , Linda Darnell , Carmen Miranda , Don Ameche , Henry Fonda , Gene Tierney , Sonja Henie , and Betty Grable . 20th Century-Fox also hired Alice Faye and Shirley Temple , who appeared in several major films for the studio in the 1930s.   Higher attendance during World War II helped 20th Century-Fox overtake RKO and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer to become the third most profitable film studio. In 1941, Zanuck was commissioned as a lieutenant colonel in the U.S. Signal Corps and assigned to supervise the production of U.S. Army training films. His partner, William Goetz , filled in at 20th Century-Fox.  In 1942, Spyros Skouras succeeded Kent as president of the studio.  During the next few years, with pictures like Wilson (1944), The Razo's Edge (1946), Boomerang , Gentlema's Agreement (both 1947), The Snake Pit (1948), and Pinky (1949), Zanuck established a reputation for provocative, adult films. 20th Century-Fox also specialized in adaptations of best-selling books such as Ben Ames Williams' Leave Her to Heaven (1945), starring Gene Tierney , which was the highest-grossing 20th Century-Fox film of the 1940s. The studio also produced film versions of Broadway musicals, including the Rodgers and Hammerstein films, beginning with the musical version of State Fair (1945), the only work that the partnership wrote specially for films. After the war, audiences slowly drifted away. 20th Century-Fox held on to its theaters until a court-mandated "divorce"; they were spun off as Fox National Theaters in 1953.  That year, with attendance at half the 1946 level, 20th Century-Fox gambled on an unproven process. Noting that the two film sensations of 1952 had been Cinerama , which required three projectors to fill a giant curved screen, and "Natural Vision" 3D , which got its effects of depth by requiring the use of polarized glasses, 20th Century-Fox mortgaged its studio to buy rights to a French anamorphic projection system which gave a slight illusion of depth without glasses. President Spyros Skouras struck a deal with the inventor Henri Chrétien , leaving the other film studios empty-handed, and in 1953 introduced CinemaScope in the studi's groundbreaking feature film The Robe .  Zanuck announced in February 1953 that henceforth all 20th Century-Fox pictures would be made in CinemaScope.  To convince theater owners to install this new process, 20th Century-Fox agreed to help pay conversion costs (about $25,000 per screen); and to ensure enough product, 20th Century-Fox leased access to CinemaScope to any rival studio choosing to use it. Seeing the box-office for the first two CinemaScope features, The Robe and How to Marry a Millionaire (also 1953), Warner Bros., MGM, RKO, Universal-International , Columbia , UA, Allied Artists , and Disney quickly adopted the process. In 1956, 20th Century-Fox engaged Robert Lippert to establish a subsidiary company, Regal Pictures , later Associated Producers Incorporated to film B pictures in CinemaScope (but "branded" RegalScope). 20th Century-Fox produced new musicals using the CinemaScope process including Carousel and The King and I (both 1956). CinemaScope brought a brief upturn in attendance, but by 1956 the numbers again began to slide.   That year Darryl Zanuck announced his resignation as head of production. Zanuck moved to Paris, setting up as an independent producer, seldom being in the United States for many years. Production and financial problems Logo used as 20th Century Fox from 1986 to 2020. Zanuc's successor, producer Buddy Adler , died a year later.  President Spyros Skouras brought in a series of production executives, but none had Zanuc's success. By the early 1960s, 20th Century-Fox was in trouble. A new version of Cleopatra (1963) began production in 1959 with Joan Collins in the lead.  As a publicity gimmick, producer Walter Wanger offered $1 million to Elizabeth Taylor if she would star;  she accepted and costs for Cleopatra began to escalate. Richard Burton's on-set romance with Taylor was surrounding the media. However, Skoura' selfish preferences and inexperienced micromanagement on the fil's production did nothing to speed up production on Cleopatra . Meanwhile, another remake—of the Cary Grant hit My Favorite Wife (1940)—was rushed into production in an attempt to turn over a quick profit to help keep 20th Century-Fox afloat. The romantic comedy entitled Somethin's Got to Give paired Marilyn Monroe , 20th Century-Fo's most bankable star of the 1950s, with Dean Martin and director George Cukor . The troubled Monroe caused delays daily, and it quickly descended into a costly debacle. As Cleopatra' s budget passed $10 million, eventually costing around $40 million, 20th Century-Fox sold its back lot (now the site of Century City ) to Alcoa in 1961 to raise funds. After several weeks of script rewrites on the Monroe picture and very little progress, mostly due to director George Cuko's filming methods, in addition to Monro's chronic sinusitis , Monroe was fired from Somethin's Got to Give  and two months later she was found dead. According to 20th Century-Fox files, she was rehired within weeks for a two-picture deal totaling $1 million, $500,000 to finish Somethin's Got to Give (plus a bonus at completion), and another $500,000 for What a Way to Go . Elizabeth Taylo's disruptive reign on the Cleopatra set continued unchallenged from 1960 into 1962, though three 20th Century-Fox executives went to Rome in June 1962 to fire her. They learned that director Joseph L. Mankiewicz had filmed out of sequence and had only done interiors, so 20th Century-Fox was then forced to allow Taylor several more weeks of filming. In the meantime during that summer of 1962 Fox released nearly all of its contract stars to offset burgeoning costs, including Jayne Mansfield .   With few pictures on the schedule, Skouras wanted to rush Zanuc's big-budget war epic The Longest Day (1962),  an accurate account of the Allied invasion of Normandy on June 6, 1944, with a huge international cast, into release as another source of quick cash. This offended Zanuck, still 20th Century-Fo's largest shareholder, for whom The Longest Day was a labor of love that he had dearly wanted to produce for many years. After it became clear that Somethin's Got to Give would not be able to progress without Monroe in the lead (Martin had refused to work with anyone else), Skouras finally decided that re-signing her was unavoidable. But days before filming was due to resume, she was found dead at her Los Angeles home and the picture resumed filming as Move Over, Darling , with Doris Day and James Garner in the leads. Released in 1963, the film was a hit.  The unfinished scenes from Somethin's Got to Give were shelved for nearly 40 years. Rather than being rushed into release as if it were a B-picture, The Longest Day was lovingly and carefully produced under Zanuc's supervision. It was finally released at a length of three hours and was well received. At the next board meeting, Zanuck spoke for eight hours, convincing directors that Skouras was mismanaging the company and that he was the only possible successor. Zanuck was installed as chairman, and then named his son Richard Zanuck as president.  This new management group seized Cleopatra and rushed it to completion, shut down the studio, laid off the entire staff to save money, axed the long-running Movietone Newsreel (the archives of which are now owned by Fox News ), and made a series of cheap, popular pictures that restored 20th Century-Fox as a major studio. The saving grace for the studi's fortunes came from the tremendous success of The Sound of Music (1965),  an expensive and handsomely produced film adaptation of the highly acclaimed Rodgers and Hammerstein Broadway musical , which became a significant success at the box office and won five Academy Awards , including Best Director ( Robert Wise ) and Best Picture of the Year . 20th Century-Fox also had two big science-fiction hits in the decade: Fantastic Voyage (1966), and the original Planet of the Apes (1968), starring Charlton Heston , Kim Hunter , and Roddy McDowall . Fantastic Voyage was the last film made in CinemaScope ; the studio had held on to the format while Panavision lenses were being used elsewhere. Zanuck stayed on as chairman until 1971, but there were several expensive flops in his last years, resulting in 20th Century-Fox posting losses from 1969 to 1971. Following his removal, and after an uncertain period, new management brought 20th Century-Fox back to health. Under president Gordon T. Stulberg and production head Alan Ladd, Jr. , 20th Century-Fox films connected with modern audiences. Stulberg used the profits to acquire resort properties, soft-drink bottlers, Australian theaters and other properties in an attempt to diversify enough to offset the boom-or-bust cycle of picture-making. Foreshadowing a pattern of film production still yet to come, in late 1973 20th Century-Fox joined forces with Warner Bros. to co-produce The Towering Inferno (1974),  an all-star action blockbuster from producer Irwin Allen . Both studios found themselves owning the rights to books about burning skyscrapers. Allen insisted on a meeting with the heads of both studios and announced that as 20th Century-Fox was already in the lead with their property it would be career suicide to have competing movies. Thus the first joint-venture studio deal was struck. In hindsight, while it may be commonplace now, back in the 1970s, it was a risky, but revolutionary, idea that paid off handsomely at both domestic and international box offices around the world. 20th Century-Fo's success reached new heights by backing the most profitable film made up to that time, Star Wars (1977). Substantial financial gains were realized as a result of the fil's unprecedented success: from a low of $6 in June 1976, stock prices more than quadrupled to almost $27 after Star Wars release; 1976 revenues of $195 million rose to $301 million in 1977.  Marvin Davis and Rupert Murdoch Fox Plaza , Century City headquarters completed in 1987 With financial stability came new owners, when 20th Century-Fox was sold for $720 million on June 8, 1981, to investors Marc Rich and Marvin Davis .  20th Century-Fo's assets included Pebble Beach Golf Links , the Aspen Skiing Company and a Century City property upon which Davis built and twice sold Fox Plaza . In 1982, the company decided to try on capitalizing the video game industry by forming the compan's first video game division, Fox Video Games, in order to sell cartridges for consoles and computers, under the "Games of the Century" slogan, but the division failed due to the video game crash of 1983 .  By 1984, Rich had become a fugitive from justice, having fled to Switzerland after being charged by U.S. federal prosecutors with tax evasion, racketeering and illegal trading with Iran during the Iran hostage crisis . Ric's assets were frozen by U.S. authorities.  In 1984 Marvin Davis bought out Marc Rich's 50% interest in 20th Century-Fox Film Corporation for an undisclosed amount,  reported to be $116 million.  Davis sold this interest to Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation for $250 million in March 1985. Davis later backed out of a deal with Murdoch to purchase John Kluge's Metromedia television stations.  Murdoch went ahead alone and bought the stations, and later bought out Davi' remaining stake in 20th Century-Fox for $325 million.  From 1985, the hyphen was permanently deleted from the brand name, with 20th Century-Fox changing to 20th Century Fox .   To gain FCC approval of 20th Century-Fo's purchase of Metromedia's television holdings, once the stations of the long-dissolved DuMont network, Murdoch had to become a U.S. citizen. He did so in 1985, and in 1986 the new Fox Broadcasting Company took to the air. Over the next 20-odd years the network and owned-stations group expanded to become extremely profitable for News Corporation. Then in 1993, 20th Century Fox bought the superhero rights to the X-Men , while the Fantastic Four was bought in 1998. Then Bryan Singer directed the first film and the second film , while Brett Ratner was hired to direct the third film of the original trilogy. In 1994, 20th Century Fox would establish four new divisions: Fox Searchlight Pictures , Fox Family Films , Fox Animation Studios , and Fox 2000 Pictures . Fox Searchlight would specialize in the specialty and indie film market, with Thomas Rothman , then president of production at The Samuel Goldwyn Company , being brought on to head up the new studio. It was soon given its name with Rothman as its founding president.   Fox Family Films was tasked with producing films geared towards families, under John Matoian .  Fox Animation Studios was established on August 9, 1994,  designed to compete with Walt Disney Feature Animation , whom had found success in the Disney Renaissance . Don Bluth and Gary Goldman of the failing Sullivan Bluth Studios were appointed to head the new $100 million animation studio.  Fox 2000 Pictures was formed to specialize in mid-budget-ranging films targeted towards underserved groups of audiences,  with Laura Ziskin brought on as president.  In August 1997, Fo's Los Angeles-based visual effects company, VIFX, acquired majority interest in Blue Sky Studios to form a new visual effects and animation company, temporarily renamed "Blue Sky/VIFX".  Blue Sky had previously did the character animation of MTV Film' first film Jo's Apartment . Following the studi's expansion, Blue Sky produced character animation for the films Alien Resurrection , A Simple Wish , Mouse Hunt , Star Trek: Insurrection and Fight Club .  VIFX was later sold to another VFX studio Rhythm and Hues Studios in March 1999.  According to Blue Sky founder Chris Wedge , Fox considered selling Blue Sky as well by 2000 due to financial difficulties in the visual effects industry in general. In February 1998, following the success of Fox Animation Studio' first film Anastasia , Fox Family Films changed its name to Fox Animation Studios and dropped its live action production. which would be picked up by other production units.  The actual Fox Animation Studios would become a division of the formerly-named Fox Family Films, being referred to as the Phoenix studio. However, Fox Animation Studios in Los Angeles would be renamed to 20th Century Fox Animation between 1998 and 1999. The Phoenix studio would face financial problems, eventually with Fox laying off 300 of the nearly 380 people who worked at the Phoenix studio  to "make films more efficiently". After the box-office failure of Titan A.E. , Fox Animation Studios would shut down on June 26, 2000.    Their last film set to be made would have been an adaptation of Wayne Barlowe's illustrated novel Barlow's Inferno , and was set to be done entirely with computer animation .  Another film they would have made was The Little Beauty King , an adult animated film directed by Steve Oedekerk , which would have been a satire of the films from the Disney Renaissance . It would predate Shrek (2001).  Chris Wedge, film producer Lori Forte, and Fox Animation executive Chris Meledandri presented Fox with a script for a comedy feature film titled Ice Age .  Studio management pressured staff to sell their remaining shares and options to Fox on the promise of continued employment on feature-length films. The studio moved to White Plains, New York and started production on Ice Age . As the film wrapped, Fox, having little faith in the film, feared that it might bomb at the box office. Fox terminated half of the production staff and tried unsuccessfully to find a buyer for the film and the studio. [ citation needed ] Instead, Ice Age was released by Fox in conjunction with 20th Century Fox Animation on March 15, 2002, to critical and commercial success, receiving a nomination for an Academy Award for Best Animated Feature at the 75th Academy Awards in 2003.  Ice Age would spawn a franchise and bolster Blue Sky into producing feature films and becoming a household name in feature animation. The Fox Broadcasting Company's Los Angeles studios in 2005 From 2000 to 2010, this company has been the international distributor for MGM / UA releases. In the 1980s, 20th Century Fox – through a joint venture with CBS called CBS/Fox Video – had distributed certain UA films on video; thus UA has come full circle by switching to 20th Century Fox for video distribution. 20th Century Fox also makes money distributing films for small independent film companies. In 2006, 20th Century Fox terminated its production with Bad Hat Harry Productions for 5 years, because Bryan Singer left X-Men: The Last Stand to direct Superman Returns (2006) for Warner Bros. Pictures , then he returned to produce the first film and direct its sequel in the prequel trilogy, starting in 2011. In late 2006, Fox Atomic was started up  under Fox Searchlight head Peter Rice and COO John Hegeman  as a sibling production division under Fox Filmed Entertainment.  In early 2008, Atomi's marketing unit was transferred to Fox Searchlight and 20th Century Fox, when Hegeman moved to New Regency Productions. Debbie Liebling became president. After two middling successes and falling short with other films, the unit was shut down in April 2009. The remaining films under its Atomic label in production and post-productions were transferred to 20th Century Fox and Fox Spotlight with Liebling overseeing them.  In 2008, 20th Century Fox announced an Asian subsidiary, Fox STAR Studios , a joint venture with STAR TV , also owned by News Corporation. It was reported that Fox STAR would start by producing films for the Bollywood market, then expand to several Asian markets.  In the same year, 20th Century Fox started Fox International Productions , but the division was closed in 2017.  Chernin Entertainment was founded by Peter Chernin after he stepped down as president of 20th Century Fo's then-parent company News Corporation. in 2009.  Chernin Entertainmen's five-year first-look deal for the film and television was signed with 20th Century Fox and 20th Century Fox TV in 2009.  21st Century Fox era On June 28, 2012, Rupert Murdoch announced that News Corporation would be split into two publishing and media-oriented companies: a new News Corporation and 21st Century Fox , which operated the Fox Entertainment Group and 20th Century Fox. Murdoch considered the name of the new company a way to maintain the 20th Century Fox heritage.   Fox Stage Productions was formed in June 2013.  In August, the same year, 20th Century Fox started a theatrical joint venture with a trio of producers, both film and theater, Kevin McCollum , John Davis and Tom McGrath.  On September 20, 2017, Locksmith Animation formed a multi-year production deal with 20th Century Fox, who would distribute Locksmit's films under 20th Century Fox Animation , with Locksmith aiming to release a film every 12–18 months. The deal was to bolster Blue Sk's output and replace the loss of distributing DreamWorks Animation films, which are now owned and distributed by Universal Pictures .  The first film to be released under the production company was Ro's Gone Wrong , which was released on October 22, 2021, by 20th Century Studios and was the only film to be released by the studio. Technoprops, a VFX company that worked on Avatar and The Jungle Book , was purchased in April 2017 to operate as Fox VFX Lab. Technoprop' founder Glenn Derry would continue to run the company as vice president of visual effect reporting to Gerard Bevan and John Kilkenny, VFX president.  On October 30, 2017, Vanessa Morrison was named president of a newly created 20th Century Fox division, Fox Family, reporting to the chairman & CEO and Vice Chairman of 20th Century Fox. The family division would develop films that appeal to younger moviegoers and their parents both animated films and films with live-action elements. Also, the division would oversee the studi's family animated television business, which produces holiday television specials based on existing film properties, and oversee feature film adaptation of its TV shows.  To replace Morrison at Fox Animation, Andrea Miloro and Robert Baird were named co-presidents of 20th Century Fox Animation.  20th Century Fox issued a default notice in regards to its licensing agreement for the under-construction 20th Century Fox World theme park in Malaysia by Genting Malaysia Bhd. In November 2018 Genting Malaysia filed suit in response and included soon to be parent The Walt Disney Company .  Disney acquisition Further information: Acquisition of 21st Century Fox by Disney On December 14, 2017, Disney announced plans to purchase most of 21st Century Fox, including 20th Century Fox, for $52.4 billion.  After a bid from Comcast (owner of NBCUniversal ) for $65 billion, Disney counterbid with $71.3 billion.  On July 19, 2018, Comcast dropped out of the bid for 21st Century Fox in favor of Sky plc and Sky UK . Eight days later, Disney and 21st Century Fox shareholders approved the merger between the two companies.  Although the deal was completed on March 20, 2019,   20th Century Fox was not planning to relocate to Walt Disney Studios in Burbank , but retained its headquarters at the Fox Studio Lot in the Century City area of Los Angeles, which is currently leased to Disney by 21st Century Fo's successor, Fox Corporation , for seven years.  Various units were moved out from under 20th Century Fox at acquisition in months after the merger along with several rounds of layoffs. The Fox Research Library was folded into the Walt Disney Archives and Walt Disney Imagineering Archives in January 2020.   The last film to use the "20th Century Fox" name was Underwater , which was released on January 10, 2020. After the box office failures of films like Dark Phoenix and Stuber , Disney halted development on several projects , though films such as Free Guy and the Avatar sequels managed to continue production. Fo's slate would be reduced to 10 films per year, half of them being made for the Hulu and then-upcoming Disney+ streaming services. Projects from 20th Century Fox franchises such as Star Wars , Home Alone , Cheaper by the Dozen , Night at the Museum , Diary of a Wimpy Kid , and Ice Age were later announced for Disney+.  These projects would later be fully revealed during Disne's Investor Day in December 2020 as feature films for the aforementioned streaming service.  The first of these projects was Home Sweet Home Alone , which was released on November 12, 2021. On January 17, 2020, Disney renamed the studio to "20th Century Studios", which served to help avoid brand confusion with Fox Corporation.  Similar to other Disney film units, distribution of 20th Century Studios films is now handled in North America by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures and internationally by their sub-division Buena Vista International , while Searchlight Pictures operates their own autonomous distribution and marketing unit.   Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment distributes the films produced by 20th Century and Searchlight in home media under the 20th Century Home Entertainment label. The first film released by Disney under the studi's new name was The Call of the Wild , which was released on February 21, 2020.  That same year, Ford vs. Ferrari (2019), among its four Academy Award nominations, earned the studio its first Best Picture nomination post-Disney acquisition. In the same year, held-over production president Emma Watts left the company.  On March 12, 2020, Steve Asbell was named president, production of 20th Century Studios, while Morrison was named president, streaming, Walt Disney Studios Motion Picture Production to oversee live-action development and production of Walt Disney Pictures and 20th Century Studios for Disney+ . Philip Steuer will now lead physical and post-production and VFX, as president of production at Walt Disney Studios Motion Picture Production. Randi Hiller will now lead casting as executive VP casting, overseeing both Walt Disney Pictures and 20th Century Studios. Steuer has served as executive VP of physical production for Walt Disney Studios since 2015, and Hiller has led casting for Walt Disney Studios since 2011. Both will dual-report to Asbell and Sean Bailey .  On September 1, 2020, the Japanese branch of 20th Century Studios, 20th Century Fox Japan, was absorbed into Disney Japan; 20th Century Studio' previous involvement with Toei Company as the Japanese co-distributor and Asian distributor for Dragon Ball films ended and were later taken over by Crunchyroll and Sony Pictures Releasing (via Sony Pictures Releasing International ).  On February 9, 2021, Disney announced that Blue Sky Studios was shut down in April 2021, and was succeeded by 20th Century Animation .   A spokesperson for the company explained that in light of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic's continued economic impact on all of its businesses, it was no longer sustainable for them to run a third feature animation studio. In addition, production on a film adaptation of the webcomic Nimona ,  originally scheduled to be released on January 14, 2022, was cancelled as a result of its closure. The studi's film library and intellectual properties are retained by Disney. Although Disney did not give an exact date as to when the studio would be closing down initially, former animator Rick Fournier confirmed on April 10 it was their last day of operation,  three days after co-founder Chris Wedge released a farewell letter on social media.  Nimona would be picked up by Annapurna Pictures in early 2022 for release on Netflix in 2023.  A horizontal version of 20th Century Studio' current print logo, used for branding films (mainly Hulu / Star originals produced by them). The first film to use this was Vacation Friends . On November 22, 2021, Disney Media and Entertainment Distribution and WarnerMedia reached an agreement to allow select 20th Century Studios films be shared between Disney+ , Hulu , and HBO Max through late 2022. The new agreement negotiated by Gerard Devan and John Gelke is an amendment to the original agreement between 20th Century Fox and HBO that Disney inherited after its acquisition of Fox in 2019, and as such, is not expected to be renewed. Following the end of the 20th Century-HBO deal, Disney plans to retain the 20th Century films on their own streaming platforms going forward after 2022.  The first film to this new strategy was Ro's Gone Wrong . Also in 2021, Disney had launched a video game based-studio 20th Century Games. Similar to its predecessors— FoxNext , Fox Interactive and 20th Century Fox Games—it acts as a distributor and has partnered with other triple-A game studios. Its first title was Aliens: Fireteam Elite .  On February 8, 2022, Steven Spielber's 2021 film version of West Side Story , among its seven Academy Award nominations, earned 20th Century Studios its first Best Picture nomination post-rebranding.  In March 2023, it was announced that Marvel Comics would be launching a 20th Century Studios imprint, which will release comics based on 20th Century franchises. The first comic under the label would be a Planet of the Apes comic.  On February 26, 2024, Walt Disney Pictures president Sean Bailey was announced to be stepping down, with Searchlight Pictures president David Greenbaum assuming his position. Greenbaum will lead Walt Disney Pictures and co-lead 20th Century with Steve Asbell as president.  Television Main article: 20th Television 20th Television is the television production division of 20th Century Studios. It was known as 20th Century Fox Television until it adopted the 20th Television name in 2020. The original 20th Television was the studi's television syndication division until it was folded into Disney-ABC Domestic Television in 2020.  During the mid-1950s, feature films were released to television in the hope that they would broaden sponsorship and help the distribution of network programs. Blocks of one-hour programming of feature films to national sponsors on 128 stations were organized by 20th Century Fox and National Telefilm Associates . 20th Century Fox received 50% interest in the NTA Film Network after it sold its library to National Telefilm Associates. This gave 90 minutes of cleared time a week and syndicated feature films (under the package title "Premiere Performance") to 110 non-interconnected stations for sale to national sponsors.  Buyout of Four Star Fox bought out the remaining assets of Four Star Television from Ronald Perelman's Compact Video in 1996.  The majority of Four Star Television's library of programs are controlled by 20th Television today.    After Murdoc's numerous buyouts during the buyout era of the eighties, News Corporation had built up financial debts of $7 billion (much from Sky TV in the UK), despite the many assets that were held by NewsCorp.  The high levels of debt caused Murdoch to sell many of the American magazine interests he had acquired in the mid-1980s. Music Main articles: 20th Century Fox Records and Fox Music Between 1933 and 1937, a custom record label called Fox Movietone was produced starting at F-100 and running through F-136. It featured songs from 20th Century Fox movies, first using material recorded and issued on Victor's Bluebird label and halfway through switched to material recorded and issued on ARC's dime store labels (Melotone, Perfect, etc.). These scarce records were sold only at Fox Theaters. The music arm of 20th Century Fox, 20th Century Fox Records , was founded in 1958. It would go defunct in 1981. Fox Records was the 20th Century Fo's music arm since 1992 before being renamed to Fox Music in 2000. It encompasses music publishing and licensing businesses, dealing primarily with Fox Entertainment Group's television and film soundtracks under license by Universal Music Group , EMI , Sony Music , and Warner Music Group . It would also go defunct on January 17, 2020, and was subsequently folded into Hollywood Records . Radio The Twentieth Century Fox Presents radio series  were broadcast between 1936 and 1942. More often than not, the shows were a radio preview featuring a medley of the songs and soundtracks from the latest movie being released into the theaters, much like the modern-day movie trailers we now see on TV, to encourage folks to head down to their nearest Picture House. The radio shows featured the original stars, with the announcer narrating a lead-up that encapsulated the performance. Motion picture film processing From its earliest ventures into movie production, Fox Film Corporation operated its own processing laboratories. The original lab was located in Fort Lee, New Jersey along with the studios. A lab was included with the new studio built in Los Angeles in 1916.  Headed by Alan E. Freedman , the Fort Lee lab was moved into the new Fox Studios building in Manhattan in 1919.  In 1932, Freedman bought the labs from Fox for $2,000,000 to bolster what at that time was a failing Fox liquidity.   He renamed the operation "DeLuxe Laboratories," which much later became Deluxe Entertainment Services Group . In the 1940s Freedman sold the labs back to what was then 20th Century Fox and remained as president into the 1960s. Under Freedma's leadership, DeLuxe added two more labs in Chicago and Toronto and processed film from studios other than Fox, such as UA and Universal . Divisions Current 20th Century Family is an American family-friendly production division of 20th Century Studios. Besides family-friendly theatrical films, the division oversees mixed media (live-action with animation), family animated holiday television specials based on film properties, and film features based on TV shows. On October 30, 2017, Morrison was transferred from her post as president of 20th Century Animation, the prior Fox Family Films, to be president of a newly created 20th Century Fox division, Fox Family, which as a mandate similar to Fox Family Films. The divisio's president also pick up supervision of a Bo's Burgers film  and some existing deals with animation producers done via Gerard Bevan and Andy Watts, including Tonko House.  With the sale of 21st Century Fox to Disney in March 2019, rights to The Dam Keeper feature animated film returned to Tonko House.  With the August 2019 20th Century Fox slate overhaul announcement , 20th Century Fox properties such as Star Wars , Home Alone , Night at the Museum , Diary of a Wimpy Kid , Cheaper by the Dozen , and the Ice Age spin-off have been assigned for Disney+ release and assigned to 20th Century Family.  On March 12, 2020, Morrison was named president, Streaming, Walt Disney Studios Motion Picture Production to oversee live action development and production and 20th Century Studios for Disney+.  20th Century Animation is an American animation studio organized as a division of 20th Century Studios, a subsidiary of Walt Disney Studios. Originally formed in 1994 as its subsidiary, it is tasked with producing feature-length films. At one point divisions were Fox Animation Studios until 2000 and Blue Sky Studios until 2021. Its successful films and franchises include Don Blut's Anastasia , The Simpsons Movie , and Blue Sk's Ice Age and Rio film series. 20th Century Games is an American video game licensor that was founded in 2021.  Beforehand, Fox and later Disney used the standard 20th Century Fox/Studios brand for licensing video games. Before that, Fox had their own publishing division— Fox Interactive (which was best known for Croc , No One Lives Forever , The Simpsons and Futurama games) which was founded in 1994 and sold to Vivendi Universal Games in March 2003 and later dissolved in 2006. 20th Century Comics is a comic publishing company formed in March 2023 in partnership with Marvel Comics .   Beforehand, Fox had its own comic division under the now-defunct Fox Atomic brand in collaboration with HarperCollins . Former Fox 2000 Pictures was an American sister studio of the larger film studios 20th Century Fox and Fox Searchlight Pictures specializing in producing independent films in mid-range releases that largely targeted mid-ranged groups.  The company dissolved in May 2021 following the release of The Woman in the Window on Netflix , and the acquisition of 21st Century Fox by Disney in March 2019.   Its successful films include Marley & Me , Life of Pi , The Fault in Our Stars , Love, Simon , Fight Club , and both Alvin and the Chipmunks and Diary of a Wimpy Kid film series. 20th Digital Studio was an American web series and web films production and distribution company, founded in 2008 as a digital media , and is a subsidiary of 20th Century Studios. The division was dissolved in April 2023.  Fox Studios was a former group of three major movie studios, each part of the defunct Fox Entertainment Group . The three film studios were Fox Studios Australia in Sydney, Australia, Fox Studios Baja in Lower California and the oldest studio, Fox Studios in Century City , home of 20th Century Fox. Disney continues to own Fox Studios Australia, now known as Disney Studios Australia . Fox Entertainment Group sold off the Baja Studios in 2007, and the Century City studios were retained by Fox Corporation , although Disney remains a major tenant at the facility. Fox VFX Lab was a former visual effects company division of 20th Century Fox that was acquired in 2017 known as Technoprops . It is led by president John Kilkenny. Besides their visual effects activities, the division oversaw different parts of the world to apply for and work on projects that include films such as Avatar , Rise of the Planet of the Apes , Alita: Battle Angel , The Jungle Book , Rogue One , Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Out of the Shadows , Doctor Strange , and Warcraft  and also video game properties like Need for Speed (2015), Battlefield 1 , Rainbow Six Siege , Watch Dogs 2 , Just Cause 3 , Rise of the Tomb Raider , Assassi's Creed Syndicate , Mafia III , Halo 4 , Street Fighter V , Call of Duty ( Call of Duty: Advanced Warfare and Black Ops III ), Far Cry ( Far Cry 5 and Primal ), Mortal Kombat ( X and 11 ), and Sonic the Hedgehog ( Forces and Team Sonic Racing ).   In 2020, Disney merged Fox VFX Lab into Lucasfilm's Industrial Light & Magic , using the Technoprops brand for the labs technology division, the majority of employees and executives were reportedly fired.     Fox Atomic is a former youth-focused film production company and division of Fox Filmed Entertainment that operated from 2006 to April 2009. Atomic was originally paired with either 20th Century Fox or its Fox Searchlight division under their same, respective leadership. In late 2006, Fox Atomic was started up  under Fox Searchlight head Peter Rice and COO John Hegeman  as a sibling production division under Fox Filmed Entertainment.  Debbie Liebling transferred to Fox Atomic in 2007 from Fox.  In January 2008, Atomi's marketing unit was transferred to Fox Searchlight and 20th Century Fox,  when Hegeman moved to Regency Enterprises . Debbie Liebling became president. After two middling successes and falling short with other films, the unit was shut down in April 2009. The remaining films under Atomic in production and post-productions were transferred to 20th Century Fox and Fox Searchlight with Liebling overseeing them.  Fox Faith is a former evangelical Christian-based film production company and division of Fox Filmed Entertainment that operated from 2006 to 2010. In addition to being paired with 20th Century Fox and Fox Searchlight, it was also paired with Fo's home video division , though has had theatrical limited release agreements with AMC Theatres and Carmike Theatres chains.  Fox Faith was considered from the studio as "morally-driven, family-friendly programming," and requires them to "have overt Christian ontent or be derived from the work of a Christian author."  Faith was located in the Republic of Palau within the Pacific Ocean until 2010 when the company ceased operations and was formed as 20th Century Fox Palau. Its final film, Mama, I Want to Sing! , was filmed in 2009, but was shelved until 2012 due to the studi's closure. 20th Century Fox Consumer Products (also known as Fox Consumer Products ) is a former American merchandising company founded in 1995. it is 20th Century Fo's merchandise division. In 2019, 20th Century Fox Consumer Products was folded into Disney Consumer Products . TCFCP is the management of the rights derived from films and television series produced by the group. it used to license and market properties worldwide on behalf of 20th Century Fox, 20th Century Fox Television and FX Networks , as well as third party lines. The division was aligned with 20th Century Fox Television , the flagship studio leading the industry in supplying award-winning and blockbuster primetime television programming and entertainment content and 20th Century Fox, one of the worl's largest producers and distributors of motion pictures throughout the world. 20th Century Fox Consumer Products engaged in merchandising of the Fox brand and Fox properties. Fox Stage Productions is the former Broadway-style music show branch founded in June 2013 by the 21st Century Fox conglomerate. after the acquisition in 2019, Fox Stage Productions was shut down to make way for Buena Vista Theatrical on July 3, 2019. Fox International Productions is the former division of 20th Century Fox (now 20th Century Studios) in charge of local production in 12 territories in China, Europe, India and Latin America from 2008 to 2017. In 2008, 20th Century Fox started Fox International Productions under president Sanford Panitch. The company had $900 million in box-office receipts by the time Panitch left the company for Sony Pictures on June 2, 2015.  Co-president of worldwide theatrical marketing and distribution for 20th Century Fox Tomas Jegeus was named president of Fox International Productions effective September 1, 2015.  The company struck a development and production deal in November 2015 with Zhejiang Huace, a Chinese entertainment group.  In December 2017, 20th Century Fox film chairman-CEO Stacey Snider indicated that Fox International Productions would be dissolved in favor of each local and regional offices producing or acquiring projects.  20th Century Fox International is the former international division of 20th Century Fox, responsible for the distribution of films outside the United States and indirectly for the distribution of home videos and DVDs. Fox-Paramount Home Entertainment is a former Nordic joint venture between 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment and Paramount Home Entertainment , founded in 2013 to manage manufacturing, distribution, marketing, and sales of each studi's Blu-ray and DVD releases, as well as sales support for digital products in the Nordic region. In 2020, following the renaming for and folding of 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment (now 20th Century Home Entertainment ), Fox-Paramount Home Entertainment was defunct and separated. Now home media releases for 20th Century Studio' films in Nordic are directly managed by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment , while SF Studios only releasing its own films from Paramount Pictures since July 2021. Logo and fanfare The 20th Century-Fox production logo and fanfare (as seen in 1947) The 20th Century Fox production logo and fanfare originated as the logo of Twentieth Century Pictures and was adopted by 20th Century-Fox after the merger in 1935. It consists of a stacked block-letter three-dimensional, monolithic logotype (nicknamed "the Monument") surrounded by Art deco buildings and illuminated by searchlights .  In the production logo that appears at the start of films, the searchlights are animated and the sequence is accompanied by a distinctive fanfare that was originally composed in 1933 by Alfred Newman .  The original layout of the logo was designed by special effects animator and matte painting artist Emil Kosa Jr.   In 1953, Rocky Longo, an artist at Pacific Title , was hired to recreate the original logo design for the new CinemaScope picture process. Longo tilted the "0" in "20th" to have the logo maintain proportions in the wider CinemaScope format.  Alfred Newman also re-composed the log's fanfare with an extension to be heard during the CinemaScope logo that would follow after the Fox logo. Although the format had since declined, director George Lucas specifically requested that the CinemaScope version of the fanfare be used for the opening titles of Star Wars (1977). Additionally, the fil's main theme was composed by John Williams in the same key as the fanfare ( B ♭ major ), serving as an extension to it of sorts.   In 1981, the logo was slightly altered with the re-straightening of the "0" in "20th".  In 1994, after a few failed attempts, Fox in-house television producer Kevin Burns was hired to produce a new logo for the company, this time using the then-new process of computer-generated imagery (CGI) adding more detail and animation, with the longer 21-second Fox fanfare arranged by Bruce Broughton used as the underscore, and a byline reading "A NEWS CORPORATION COMPANY". It would later be re-recorded by David Newman in 1997 and again in 1998.   In 2009, an updated logo created by Blue Sky Studios (a prototype version of the 2009 structure exists) debuted with the release of Avatar .  In 2013, the News Corporation byline was removed. On September 16, 2014, 20th Century Fox posted a video showcasing all of the various versions of the logo, plus the "William Fox Presents" version of the Fox Film logo and the 20th Century Pictures logo, including some variations, up until the 2009 version of the logo, with the 1998 re-arrangement version of the 1997 version of the fanfare composed by David Newman, to promote the new Fox Movies website.  On January 17, 2020, it was reported that Disney had begun to phase out the "Fox" name from the studi's branding as it is no longer tied to the current Fox Corporation , with 20th Century Fox and Fox Searchlight Pictures respectively renamed to 20th Century Studios and Searchlight Pictures. Branding elements associated with the studio, including the searchlights, monolith, and fanfare, will remain in use. The first film that carries the new 20th Century Studios name is The Call of the Wild (coincidentally the original film adaptation was the original Twentieth Century Pictures' final movie before its merger with Fox Film).    The 20th Century Studios logo and fanfare in use since the studi's re-branding in 2020. For the 20th Century Studios logo, its print logo debuted on a movie poster of The New Mutants   while the on-screen logo debuted in a television advertisement for and the full version debuted on February 21, 2020, with the film The Call of the Wild .  The 20th Century Studios logo was animated by Picturemill (the prototype version of the 2020 structure and the 2021 structure with the 2009 sky background exists and appeared in some of Picturemill reels), based on Blue Sky Studio' animation. It features a slightly different sky backdrop, the Los Angeles skyline is larger and more detailed, and the rest of the structure appears darker with more realistic lighting.   Film library Main article: Lists of 20th Century Studios films Film series Highest-grossing films † Indicates films playing in theatres in the week commencing 5 July 2024. ‡ — Includes theatrical reissue(s) See also 20th Century Studios portal 20th Century Animation 20th Century Family 20th Century Games Searchlight Pictures Star Studios 20th Television 20th Television Animation

American film distribution studio Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures (previously known as Buena Vista Film Distribution, Buena Vista Distribution, Inc. And Buena Vista Pictures Distribution Inc. ) is an American film distributor within the Disney Entertainment division of the Walt Disney Company .  It handles theatrical and occasional digital distribution, marketing and promotion for films produced and released by the Walt Disney Studios , including Walt Disney Pictures , Walt Disney Animation Studios , Pixar , Marvel Studios , Lucasfilm , 20th Century Studios , and internationally Searchlight Pictures ; which operates its own autonomous theatrical distribution and marketing unit in the United States.  The company was originally established by Walt Disney in 1953 as Buena Vista Film Distribution Company Inc (later renamed Buena Vista Distribution Inc and Buena Vista Pictures Distribution Inc ). It took on its current name in late 2007.   History [ edit ] Before in 1953, Disne's productions were previously distributed by: M.J. Winkler Pictures (1924–1926), Film Booking Offices of America (1926–1927), Universal Pictures (1927–1928), Celebrity Productions (1928–1930), Columbia Pictures (1930–1932), United Artists (1932–1937, and 1943 ), RKO Radio Pictures (1937–1953 ; 1937–1956 ).  Buena Vista [ edit ] See also: Buena Vista (brand) A dispute with RKO Pictures in 1953 over the distribution of The Living Desert , Disne's first full-length film in the True-Life Adventures series,  led Walt and his older brother Roy O. Disney to form its wholly owned subsidiary, the Buena Vista Film Distribution Company, Inc. (BVDC), to handle North American distribution of their own products.  RKO refused to distribute the film.  The name "Buena Vista" came from the eponymus street in Burbank, California, where the Walt Disney Studios was located (and remains to this day). Buena Vist's first release was the Academy Award -winning live-action feature The Living Desert on November 10, 1953, along with Toot, Whistle, Plunk and Boom , Buena Vist's first animated release.  Notable subsequent releases included the Austrian film Victoria in Dover , the Japanese Daiei film Princess Yang Kwei Fei ( Most Noble Lady ), released in US theaters in September 1956,    The Missouri Traveler in March 1958,  and The Big Fisherman in July 1959 (the first third-party production financed by Disney).  By July 5, 1957, RKO Japan, Ltd. was sold to Disney Productions and British Commonwealth Film Corporation. In allocating the foreign film licenses to the company, Disney would use 5 and Commonwealth 8.  In April 1960, the company dropped "Film" from its name.  In 1961, Disney incorporated Buena Vista International (BVI),  distributing its first PG-rated film, Take Down , in January 1979.  The low-budget movie was not produced by the Disney studios and was acquired from an independent studio, making The Black Hole the first PG-rated Disney film.  In July 1987, Buena Vista changed its name to Buena Vista Pictures Distribution, Inc. (BVPD).  Late in the 1980s, Disney purchased a controlling stake in one of Pacific Theatres' chains  leading to Disne's Buena Vista Theaters and Pacific to renovate the El Capitan Theatre and the Crest by 1989.  The Crest was finished first while El Capitan opened with the premiere of The Rocketeer film on June 19, 1991.  In 1992, Buena Vista made production loans totaling $5.6 million to Cinergi Pictures for its film Medicine Man and its 1994 films Renaissance Man and Color of Night and were distributing Cinerg's films. The corporation purchased a 12.8% share in Cinergi with its initial public offering in 1994.  Soon, BVPD signed a 25 picture distribution deal with Cinergi.   The Gaumont Film Company and Disney formed Gaumont Buena Vista International, a joint venture in French distribution, in 1993.  In August 1996, Disney and Tokuma Shoten Publishing agreed that Disney would distribute Studio Ghibli animated films and provide 10% of the production cost of the studi's current in-production film, Spirited Away .    Disney would go on to produce the English dubs and distribute 15 of Ghibl's films, through the Walt Disney Pictures , Buena Vista Home Video , Miramax and Touchstone Pictures banners.  In September 1996, following Disne's acquisition of Capital Cities/ABC , Buena Vista Pictures Distribution, Inc. was merged  into ABC, Inc.,  the parent company of that group. For the November 1995 premiere of Toy Story , Disney rented the Hollywood Masonic Temple —adjacent to the El Capitan Theatre—for Totally Toy Story , a multimedia funhouse and a promotional event for the movie.  On July 17, 1998, Buena Vista Pictures Distribution purchased the Hollywood Masonic Temple building to continue using it as a promotional venue.  By 1997, BVP's share in Cinergi dropped to 5%. After nine films were delivered under the agreement, Cinergi sold Disney on November 22, 1997; all of its 12-film library except for Die Hard with a Vengeance plus $20 million in exchange for Disne's Cinergi share holdings, production advances of $35.4 million and other loans.   In 2002, Disney signed a four animated film deal with Vanguard Animation ;  however, only one film was released under that negotiation.  In 2004, BVI and Gaumont dissolved their French distribution joint venture, Gaumont Buena Vista International.  Buena Vista International agreed to a distribution deal with MegaStar Joint Venture Company Limited in April 2006 for the Vietnam market.  Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures [ edit ] On April 25, 2007, Disney discontinued the usage of the Buena Vista brand in its distribution branding.  In early 2009, Disney entered a distribution agreement with a reorganized DreamWorks ; the deal called for an estimated 30 films over a five-year period from DreamWorks and they would be released through the Touchstone banner.  In 2011, GKIDS acquired the North American theatrical distribution rights of the Ghibli films, with Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment retaining the home video rights until July 2017 when Shout! Factory took over the home video rights. However, Disney only handles home video distribution of the compan's films in Japan and formerly Taiwan and China.   Disne's distribution deal with DreamWorks expired in August 2016, after the two studios decided to not renew their agreement on December 16, 2015, with Universal Pictures replacing Disney as DreamWork' distributor.   By the end of the deal, Disney had distributed 14 of DreamWork's original 30-picture agreement; thirteen through Touchstone and one through Walt Disney Pictures .   Disney took complete ownership rights of those 14 DreamWorks films from Amblin Partners in exchange for loans made to that company.  The Light Between Oceans , the final film in that distribution deal, was also the last film released under the Touchstone banner. On December 14, 2017, the Walt Disney Company announced plans to purchase 21st Century Fox , which included 20th Century Fox and Fox Searchlight Pictures . On March 20, 2019, the acquisition of 21st Century Fox was completed.  Following the reorganization and renaming of the acquired film units, Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures began distributing 20th Century Studios films in the United States while WDSM's Buena Vista International is distributing the studi's films internationally (along with Searchlight), while Searchlight Pictures continued to operate their autonomous distribution unit.   in 2025 Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures will worldwidley distributes 20th Century Studios and Searchlight Pictures movies in theatrically. In late 2020 and early 2021, Disney reorganized the studio, placing it under the Disney Media and Entertainment Distribution unit which also oversees distribution to Disney+ .  Under this structure, the Theatrical Distribution unit oversaw the domestic and international films produced by all the studios within the Walt Disney Studios umbrella.  In February 2023, returning CEO Bob Iger reversed this decision and reorganized the studio again, returning it as a division under the purview of The Walt Disney Studios . Distribution [ edit ] Main article: Lists of Walt Disney Studios films Walt Disney Studios has produced or distributed 35 films that have received nominations for the Academy Award for Best Picture : fifteen from its former Miramax division,  six from Touchstone Pictures , five from Searchlight Pictures , four from Walt Disney Pictures , three from 20th Century Studios , two from Hollywood Pictures , and one from Marvel Studios .     Of those nominated films, five films—Mirama's The English Patient , Shakespeare in Love , Chicago , No Country for Old Men , and Searchligh's Nomadland —have won Best Picture.    Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures currently distributes films from across all units of Walt Disney Studios with the exception of Searchlight Pictures , which maintains its own autonomous distribution and marketing operations for releases in select markets.   Other Disney film units and some third-party studios including: International distribution [ edit ] Main article: Lists of Walt Disney Studios films Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures International was formed in 1961 as Buena Vista International .  On May 4, 1987, despite being industry rivals, Disney signed a theatrical distribution agreement with Warner Bros. International for the release of Disney and Touchstone films in many overseas markets except in Australia and New Zealand , where distribution went through Roadshow Distributors instead (due to Roadshow also theatrically distributing Warner films as well during this period), with Disney retaining full control of all distribution and marketing decisions on their product (one notable practice in this policy is obscuring Warner references in posters and it is credited only in very small text with the exception of some UK posters where sometimes the full logo is shown).  Warner previously had an overseas distribution partnership with Columbia Pictures , but it was dissolved in 1988. In 1992, Disney opted to end their joint venture with Warner Bros. to start autonomously distributing their films in these aforementioned overseas markets beginning with Aladdin , inspiring Warner Bros. to establish the Family Entertainment label to self-distribute family-friendly films under the Warner umbrella at the same period. In those territories from 1993 to 2007, Disney reactivated the Buena Vista International name, and also sent distribution under it in countries that did not have any current arrangements with other companies. [ citation needed ] Disney would then continue its overseas film distribution relationship with Warner Bros. through a home video distribution deal in Europe and Australia in which Warner Home Video distributed select Disney material on DVD from 1999 to 2002, when Disney opted to self-distribute DVDs in these aforementioned territories. Italia Film, a Lebanese film distribution and production company, is Disne's exclusive theatrical film distribution partner for various Middle East and North Africa ( MENA ) markets since 1993, after making a deal directly with Buena Vista International at the time. Prior to this, Warner Bros. originally handled said MENA markets except in Israel where Buena Vista handled theatrical distribution by themselves.  In Taiwan , MGM first handled Disne's distribution, with 20th Century Fox and Warner Bros. later taking over. A local distributor called Era Communications took over distribution from 1992 to 1995. At that time, Buena Vista began its Taiwanese operations. Columbia ended its joint distribution unit with Fox and switched to Buena Vista in 1999.  Rights to Disne's films in West Germany were originally released by MGM (under CIC in the early 1970s) and later to 20th Century Fox , and then to United International Pictures  before the Warner Bros. joint venture. In September 2004, Buena Vista International announced they would begin to start theatrically distributing certain films from Universum Film in Germany and Austria beginning in February 2005, replacing a previous deal with United International Pictures .  The deal ended in late 2019 after Universum was sold by the RTL Group to Tele München Group , who began to self-distribute releases afterwards under the Leonine Distribution name. In Spain , Filmayer S.A. originally released Disne's movies, with Warner Española S.A. later taking over. In the United Kingdom , Disne's movies were released through a collaboration of Disney and 20th Century Fox known as UK Film Distributors Ltd. before the Warner Bros. joint venture. In Italy and Brazil , Disne's movies were distributed by Cinema International Corporation and United International Pictures before the Warner Bros. joint venture. In Australia and New Zealand , Disne's movies were distributed initially by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer , before distribution switched to British Empire Films (later Greater Union Film Distributors ) following the merger of the Australian MGM cinema chains until the latter merged with Village Roadshow in 1987 and Roadshow Films took over distribution.  The company begin distributing films in Australia and New Zealand in 1999 after its own distribution deal with Roadshow expired in 1998.  In some other countries in Europe, such as Poland , Hungary and the Czech Republic , Disne's movies were instead released through local distributors, such as Filmoteka Narodowa in Poland, InterCom Zrt. in Hungary and Guild Film Distribution in the Czech Republic respectively. Disney and Sony Pictures formed in 1997 a film distribution joint venture in Southeast Asia.  By December 2006, 14 joint distribution ventures with Sony Pictures Releasing International were formed and exist in countries including Brazil , Mexico , Singapore , Thailand and the Philippines . In January 2007, their fifteenth such partnership began operations in Russia and CIS .  In February 2017, Sony starting leaving the Southeast Asia venture with the Philippines. On August 14, 2017, Sony terminated the joint venture agreement for their own operations.  On January 31, 2019, in anticipation of the then-pending acquisition of the most 21st Century Fox assets (which includes 20th Century Fox), Disney agreed to sell its stake in the Mexican joint venture named Walt Disney Studios Sony Pictures Releasing de México to Sony Pictures Releasing .  In Greece and Cyprus , Disne's movies are distributed through local distributor Feelgood Entertainment, which also distributes Sony Pictures films in those territories. In Japan, to adapt Japa's theatrical and home media distribution model, Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures Japan and Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment Japan were merged as Walt Disney Studios Japan on March 1, 2010, the distribution unit was renamed Walt Disney Japan on November 22, 2016.  In China , due to its regulated policies on international film distribution, all of Disne's films in China are distributed by China Film Co., Ltd. and/or Huaxia Film Distribution , but Disney still hold all promotional rights of their films unless i's sold to third-party companies. Disney distributed the 2008 Indian Tamil film Dasavathaaram in Canada under the Buena Vista International banner.  The Australian-produced film Subdivision was released in the Australian and New Zealand theaters on August 20, 2009, by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures under the Buena Vista International label in Australia with Lightning Entertainment handling the international distribution. On October 3, 2017, it was announced that Disney would be handling international distribution of M. Night Shyamalan's Glass , released in early 2019, through the Buena Vista International banner. The film is a sequel to his earlier films Unbreakable (distributed by Disney through Touchstone) and Split (distributed by Universal Pictures ). Through an arrangement made with Disney, Universal retained domestic rights to the film, while Disney distributed in international territories under the label.  The UK-produced film Patrick was also released in 2018 by Disney under the Buena Vista International label in the UK.  Missing Link was also released by Disney under Buena Vista International in Latin America, Russia and some countries in Asia.   Since 2020, and in the UK from 2020 to 2023, Buena Vista International is the international distributor of 20th Century Studios and Searchlight Pictures films outside the United States as in North America the 20th Century films are distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures and Searchlight films are distributed by Searchlight Pictures itself. Starting with The Boogeyman and Theater Camp ,   20th Century and Searchlight films are now distributed in the UK through Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures International, replacing Buena Vista International. However, BVI continues to distribute 20th Century and Searchlight films elsewhere (particularly in Europe). On February 11, 2022, the Latin American branch of Buena Vista International was renamed Star Distribution , as the Star branding replaced the Buena Vista brand company-wide in the Latin American region by Disney Latin America .  On November 3, 2022, the Brazilian branch of Buena Vista International was also renamed Star Distribution following the dropping of the Buena Vista brand in the Latin American region on February 11, 2022. However, the Buena Vista International name is still used on Latin American and Brazilian prints of 20th Century/Searchlight titles.   Film library [ edit ] Main article: Lists of Walt Disney Studios films Highest-grossing films [ edit ] Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures has released the most films that have crossed the $1 billion mark (twenty-seven, in worldwide grosses among major Hollywood studios ), with thirteen of the twenty highest-grossing films of all time being distributed by Disney; including the highest-grossing film in North America ( Star Wars: The Force Awakens )  Of those thirteen films, four of them have crossed the $2 billion mark in worldwide grosses, the most for any studio. Disney has directly distributed three of the top five highest-grossing films in history ( Avengers: Endgame , Avatar: The Way of Water , and Star Wars: The Force Awakens ) and has owned the rights to the other two films ( Avatar and Titanic ) since their release.  In addition, Disney is the first of only three studios that have released at least two billion-dollar films in the same year (the others being Warner Bros. and Universal Pictures ).  Furthermore, Disney is the only studio that has achieved this seven times, in 2010, 2013, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, and 2019. 2016 included four $1 billion releases, and 2019 included seven $1 billion releases, both records for any studio. Eight of the top ten highest-grossing animated films have been released by Disney, as well as sixteen of the twenty highest-grossing G-rated films.  In addition, four of the top five opening weekends were Disney releases.  In 2015, Disney achieved its largest yearly box-office gross worldwide and in North America.   In 2016, Disney surpassed $7 billion in worldwide yearly box-office gross—the first of any major studio—surpassing the previous 2015 record.  In 2019, Disney became the first studio ever to have seven releases cross $1 billion each in a single year. In the same year, Disney broke the previous records by making an unprecedented $13.2 billion at the global box office.  † Indicates films playing in theaters in the week commencing 5 July 2024. ‡ —Includes theatrical reissue(s)

2024 Illumination film Despicable Me 4 is a 2024 American animated comedy film produced by Universal Pictures and Illumination , and distributed by Universal. It serves as the sequel to Despicable Me 3 (2017), the fourth main installment, and the sixth overall installment in the Despicable Me franchise. The film was directed by Chris Renaud , co-directed by Patrick Delage (in his feature directorial debut), produced by Chris Meledandri and Brett Hoffman, and written by Mike White and Ken Daurio . It stars the voices of Steve Carell , Kristen Wiig , Pierre Coffin , Joey King , Miranda Cosgrove , Steve Coogan , Sofía Vergara , Stephen Colbert , Renaud, Madison Polan, Dana Gaier , Chloe Fineman , and Will Ferrell . In the film, Gru (Carell) and his family are forced to relocate to a safe house to hide from Maxime Le Mal (Ferrell), an old schoolmate and rival of Gru who seeks revenge with his girlfriend Valentina (Vergara). At the same time, one of the new neighbors, Poppy Prescott (King) is intent on getting Gru to help her to get enrolled to his old school. Development on a fourth main Despicable Me film began in September 2017. It was officially confirmed in February 2022, with Renaud, Delage, and White attached as director, co-director, and writer, respectively. Production was underway by June 2022. Most of the main voice cast was announced in January 2024, with Hoffman and Daurio revealed as co-producer and co-writer, respectively. Heitor Pereira and Pharrell Williams returned from previous installments to compose the score and write original songs and themes, respectively. Despicable Me 4 premiered at the Jazz at Lincoln Center in New York City on June 9, 2024. It was theatrically released in Australia on June 20 and in the United States on July 3. The film received mixed reviews from critics and has grossed $245 million worldwide. Plot [ edit ] Anti-Villain League (AVL) agent Felonious Gru attends a reunion at his school Lycée Pas Bon where he reunites with his rival Maxime Le Mal, who has a feud with Gru for stealing his talent show act when they were younger. Maxime reveals he has enhanced himself with cockroach parts to make himself overpowered and so he can conquer the world, but Gru has him arrested with the help of the AVL. Maxime escapes prison and reveals his invention that turns people into human-roach hybrids, which he plans to use specifically on Gr's biological infant son Felonious Gru Jr. Silas Ramsbottom visits the Gru household to inform them of Maxim's escape, and the AVL will have to relocate the Gru family to a house in another town under new identities. Most of the Minions are taken in by the AVL, where Silas selects five of them—Dave, Mel, Gus, Tim and Jerry—to be augmented with powers under an initiative called the Megaminions, but the initiative is called off after the group causes damage in a city. In their new well-off residential town, Gru and his family meet their neighbors the Prescotts and their daughter Poppy. Poppy, an aspiring villain, recognizes Gru from his former career as a villain and threatens to blow his cover unless he helps her pull a heist to steal Lycée Pas Bo's mascot, a honey badger named Lenny so she can be enrolled there. The pair, with the help of three Minions and Gru Jr., successfully steal Lenny from the school. The schoo's principal Übelschlecht identifies Gru via security cam footage and contacts Maxime to inform him about Gr's whereabouts using a tracker in Lenn's collar. The next day, while Gru and Lucy are away at tennis practice with the Prescotts, Principal Übelschlecht visits the house to interrogate the girls about Gr's whereabouts. Gru and Lucy rush back home after being called by Margo and they fight Übelschlecht. Lucy also contacts the AVL who in turn calls the Megaminions out of retirement to stop Maxime. In the chaos, however, Gru Jr. leaves the house and is spotted by Maxime who proceeds to kidnap him. Gru meets up with Maxime at a building where he reveals he has transformed Gru Jr. into a roach hybrid and fights him off with Gru Jr. Gr's encouraging words to his son manage to break Gru Jr. free from his state and attack Maxime instead. Maxime falls to the ground where he is further squashed by the Megaminions and the aid of many animals and insects, who arrive in turn to arrest him. Gru and his family return to their home, where Dr. Nefario reverses Gru Jr's transformation. Gru later visits Maxime in prison to talk and settle their differences. The pair then performs " Everybody Wants to Rule the World " at a prison for the prisoners, including all of Gr's past adversaries, while Poppy is shown to have enrolled in Lycée Pas Bon. Voice cast [ edit ] Steve Carell as Felonious Gru , a former supervillain turned Anti-Villain League agent; who is Margo, Edith, and Agne' adoptive father, the biological father of Gru Jr., and Luc's husband, who poses as "Chet Cunningham" Kristen Wiig as Lucy Wilde, an Anti-Villain League agent, Gr's wife and adoptive mother to Margo, Edith, and Agnes, and Gru Jr's biological mother, who poses as "Blanche Cunningham" Will Ferrell as Maxime Le Mal, a French-accented supervillain with enhanced cockroach parts who seeks revenge on Gru and his family Joey King as Poppy Prescott, an aspiring supervillain who has admired Gru for a long time, and Gr's new neighbor in Mayflower  Sofía Vergara as Valentina, Maxim's femme fatale girlfriend Stephen Colbert as Perry Prescott, Popp's father, Pats's husband, and Gr's new neighbor in Mayflower  Chloe Fineman as Patsy Prescott, Popp's mother, Perr's wife, and Gr's new neighbor in Mayflower  Miranda Cosgrove as Margo, Gru and Luc's oldest adopted daughter, who poses as "Bree Cunningham" Steve Coogan as Silas Ramsbottom, the previously retired director of the Anti-Villain League Pierre Coffin as the Minions , the yellow henchmen of Gru, most of whom later get jobs at the Anti-Villain League as agents Dana Gaier as Edith, Gru and Luc's middle adopted daughter, who poses as "Blair Cunningham" Madison Polan as Agnes, Gru and Luc's youngest adopted daughter, who poses as "Britney Cunningham". Polan replaces Nev Scharrel from the third film Chris Renaud as Principal Übelschlecht, the principal of Lycée Pas Bon Additionally, John DiMaggio , who had previously voiced one of the former henchmen of Wild Knuckles in Minions: The Rise of Gru (2022) and a Scoutmaster in the Minion Scouts animated short, voices Karl, a bus driver who works for the AVL transporting the remaining Minions to their new destination. Laraine Newman voices Melora, a salon customer who was accidentally burned by Lucy, and Romesh Ranganathan voices Dr. Nefario, Gr's gadgeteer who provides inventions for him and his Minions. Ranganathan replaces Nefari's long-time actor, Russell Brand . Non-speaking cameos at the end of the film include Gr's neighbor, Fred McDade, his mother Marlena, and his twin brother Dru, as well as several villains from previous installments: Vector, his father Mr. Perkins, El Macho, Balthazar Bratt, Scarlet and Herb Overkill, and the remaining members of the Vicious 6; Belle Bottom, Jean-Clawed, Svengeance, Stronghold, and Nun-Chuck. Production [ edit ] Development of Despicable Me 4 began in September 2017, with longtime Despicable Me and Illumination writers Cinco Paul and Ken Daurio writing early drafts of the script.  The film was officially confirmed in February 2022, with veteran Despicable Me director Chris Renaud , Patrick Delage, and Mike White attached as director, co-director, and writer, respectively, and a July 3, 2024, release date announced.   Production was underway by June 2022, with Steve Carell starting his voice recording after a "couple of sessions".  Most of the production was done during the COVID-19 pandemic .  In January 2024, it was announced that Carell, Kristen Wiig , Miranda Cosgrove , Dana Gaier , Pierre Coffin , and Steve Coogan would return to reprise their respective roles as Gru, Lucy Wilde, Margo, Edith, the Minions, and Silas Ramsbottom, while Will Ferrell , Joey King , Sofía Vergara , Stephen Colbert , Chloe Fineman , and Madison Polan (replacing Nev Scharrel) would join the voice cast, respectively voicing Maxime Le Mal, Poppy Prescott, Valentina, Perry Prescott, Patsy Prescott, and Agnes.   That same month, it was announced that The Super Mario Bros. Movie (2023) executive producer Brett Hoffman and Daurio had been added as co-producer and co-writer, respectively.  Animation [ edit ] According to film director Chris Renaud, some of the characters who appeared in previous films had their character rigs and surfaces updated for this sequel. Fred McDade, who had not appeared since the first film was recreated from scratch as his character model was too old. The sequence where Poppy plays with an arcade machine originally started out as an animation test for the character but the filmmakers liked the sequence it was added to the final cut of the film.  Music [ edit ] In March 2024, Heitor Pereira was announced to be composing the fil's score, returning from the previous installments.  Pharrell Williams was also confirmed to be returning to co-compose the score with Pereira as well as to write new songs.  On May 8, Williams previewed a 30-second snippet of his original song " Double Life " for the film on his YouTube channel.  On June 14, 2024, Williams released the song as the first single from the Despicable Me 4 soundtrack.  The song has been interpreted as a diss track aimed at Canadian rapper Drake .   Writing for Uproxx , Derrick Rossignol observed that "the tune isn’t as general and movie-agnostic as something like " Happy ," but it has a great groove, and that Gru refrain is actually catchy as hell. This probably won’t be a world-changing single like "Happy," but i's in the upper tier of kids movie soundtrack fare."  The original soundtrack was released on June 27, 2024, by Back Lot Music.  Marketing [ edit ] The first trailer for the film was released on January 28, 2024, during the 2023–24 NFL playoff championship games.  The trailer features the songs " Sweet Child ' Mine " by Guns ' Roses and " Maneater " by Hall & Oates , as well as in television showings, " Through the Fire and Flames " by DragonForce . CBR reported that the trailer showcased "the struggles of welcoming in a new member of the Gru family" and included the debut of Will Ferrel's Maxime Le Mal.  Screen Rant' s Brennan Klein observed that Gr's tumultuous relationship with his son, Gru Jr., contrasted with the good relationship with his adopted daughters.  An additional trailer was revealed on February 11 during Super Bowl LVIII , being narrated by Jon Hamm , who previously voiced Herb Overkill in the 2015 spin-off film Minions , and featuring cameos by Ferrell and Steve Carell. Ryan Gajewski of The Hollywood Reporter said the trailer appeared to "tout the benefits of modern technology but feature strange images supposedly generated by AI ," enjoying the Renaissance -era-inspired poses of Ferrell and Carell in the trailer.  On April 10, at CinemaCon , Universal displayed a clip of Gru and Poppy trying to steal a honey badger .  Brennan Kline of Screen Rant appreciated that the clip solidified the "important element" of Gr's domestic family man status in the sequel.  The second trailer was released on May 7, 2024.  Writing for TheWrap , Drew Taylor called the trailer "Minions-heavy" and pointed out one of Pharrell William' new original songs featured in the trailer.  Collider noted the "devastating consequences" of enlisting a small group of Minion volunteers for an experiment that gave them superpowers . Journalist Diego Peralta pointed out a sequence in which one of the super-powered minions destroys a part of their base with laser vision and said that villains Maxime and Valentina "are more dangerous than any threat Gru has faced before."  On June 8, 2024, Illumination released a parody teaser for the film in which Steve Carell announces the Megaverse , a parody of shared universes such as the Marvel Cinematic Universe and DC Extended Universe , by claiming that Illumination would release 100 year' worth of films, television series, and stage productions starring the Mega Minions.  Illumination also published a website for the Megaverse .  Some of the fake productions noted on the website include Mega Minions: The Tax Write-Off and an untitled Mega Minions spin-off series with a "story to be determined based on rigorous market testing and ad hoc decision-making."  [ non-primary source needed ] The stunt was praised [ by whom? ] for its lampooning of current Hollywood affairs such as the cancellation of Warner Bros. films like Batgirl , Scoob! Holiday Haunt and Coyote vs. Acme and the 2022 DCEU film Black Adam , as well as the mixed reception to Disney's live-action remakes of their classic animated films and many of Marve's recent productions, such as Ant-Man and the Wasp: Quantumania and Secret Invasion .  [ failed verification ] Release [ edit ] Theatrical [ edit ] Despicable Me 4 premiered at the Jazz at Lincoln Center in New York City on June 9, 2024,  and made its French premiere at the Annecy International Animation Film Festival on June 13.  The film was theatrically released in Australia on June 20,  and in the United States on July 3.  Home media [ edit ] As part of Universa's long-term deal with Netflix , the film will stream on Peacock for the first four months of the pay-TV window, before moving to Netflix for the next ten and returning to Peacock for the remaining four.   Reception [ edit ] Box office [ edit ] As of July 8, 2024  , Despicable Me 4 has grossed $131.9 million in the United States and Canada, and $108.4 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $240.2 million.   In the United States and Canada, Despicable Me 4 was projected to gross $100–125 million from 4,030 theaters in its five-day opening weekend.   The film made $27 million on its first day and $26.8 million on its second.   It went on to debut to $75 million over the traditional three-day weekend, along with a total five-day gross of $122.6 million, topping the box office.  Critical response [ edit ] On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , 52% of 117 critic' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 5.4/10. The websit's consensus reads: "Fast paced and teeming with slapstick gags, Despicable Me 4 is as overstuffed as a piñata but full of enough candy to give audiences an enjoyable sugar rush."  Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned the film a score of 50 out of 100, based on 33 critics, indicating "mixed or average" reviews.  Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale (same as the first two films), while those surveyed by PostTrak gave the film an 82% positive score, with 63% saying they would definitely recommend it.  Variety admitted the film is entertaining but found the plot overcrowded with useless characters: "One thing is absolutely certain: We have't seen the last of these characters, even if we might prefer that a few of them sit out the next sequel—like the Mega Minions, who are't nearly as cute as they sound."  A similar appraisal can be found in Screen Rant  or in The Hollywood Reporter , noting, for example, the underdeveloped role of the villain in the midst of the various plot lines: "Running a brisk 95 minutes, Despicable Me 4 does't leave enough time for Maxime to enact his plans in a way that packs an emotional punch."  ABC News commented: "Should a review of a'Despicable M' movie be a thoughtful analysis or just a list of the funny stuff the Minions do in it? As much as I might believe in the value of film criticism, I kind of suspect that even the finest points of assessment would be dismantled about as fast as a Minion can say'Bello!' "

American film studio Universal City Studios LLC , doing business as Universal Pictures (informally as Universal Studios or also known simply as Universal ) is an American film production and distribution company, a division of Universal Studios , which is owned by NBCUniversal , a division of Comcast . Founded in 1912 by Carl Laemmle , Mark Dintenfass , Charles O. Baumann , Adam Kessel , Pat Powers , William Swanson, David Horsley , Robert H. Cochrane, and Jules Brulatour , Universal is the oldest surviving film studio in the United States and the fifth oldest in the world after Gaumont , Pathé , Titanus , and Nordisk Film , and is one of the "Big Five" film studios . The most commercially successful film franchises from Universal include Fast & Furious , Jurassic Park , and Despicable Me . Additionally, the studi's library includes many individual films such as Jaws and E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial , both of which became the highest-grossing films of all time during their initial releases. Universal Pictures is a member of the Motion Picture Association (MPA), and was one of the "Little Three" majors during Hollywoo's golden age .  History Early years Carl Laemmle (1867–1939) Mark Dintenfass (1872–1933), co-founder of Universal Universal was founded by Carl Laemmle , Mark Dintenfass, Charles O. Baumann , Adam Kessel, Pat Powers , William Swanson, David Horsley , Robert H. Cochrane  and Jules Brulatour . One story has Laemmle watching a box office for hours, counting patrons, and calculating the da's takings. Within weeks of his Chicago trip, Laemmle gave up dry goods to buy the first several nickelodeons . For Laemmle and other such entrepreneurs, the creation in 1908 of the Edison-backed Motion Picture Patents Company (or the "Edison Trust") meant that exhibitors were expected to pay fees for Trust-produced films they showed. Based on the Latham Loop used in cameras and projectors, along with other patents, the Trust collected fees on all aspects of movie production and exhibition and attempted to enforce a monopoly on distribution. Soon, Laemmle and other disgruntled nickelodeon owners decided to avoid paying Edison by producing their own pictures. In June 1909, Laemmle started the Yankee Film Company with his brothers-in-law  Abe Stern and Julius Stern .  That company quickly evolved into the Independent Moving Pictures Company (IMP), with studios in Fort Lee, New Jersey , where many early films in Americ's first motion picture industry were produced in the early 20th century.     Laemmle broke with Ediso's custom of refusing to give billing and screen credits to performers. By naming the movie stars, he attracted many of the leading players of the time, contributing to the creation of the star system . In 1910, he promoted Florence Lawrence , formerly known as " The Biograph Girl ",  and actor King Baggot , in what may be the first instance of a studio using stars in its marketing. Poster for Ivanhoe (1913) The Universal Film Manufacturing Company was incorporated in New York City on April 30, 1912.  Laemmle, who emerged as president in July 1912, was the primary figure in the partnership with Dintenfass, Baumann, Kessel, Powers, Swanson, Horsley, and Brulatour. The company was established on June 8, 1912, formed in a merger of Independent Moving Pictures (IMP), the Powers Motion Picture Company , Rex Motion Picture Manufacturing Company , Champion Film Company , Nestor Film Company , and the New York Motion Picture Company .  Eventually all would be bought out by Laemmle. The new Universal studio was a vertically integrated company , with movie production, distribution, and exhibition venues all linked in the same corporate entity, the central element of the Studio system era. Melodrama A Great Love (1916) by Clifford S. Elfelt for Universal Big U. Dutch intertitles, 12:33. Collection EYE Film Institute Netherlands . Following the westward trend of the industry, by the end of 1912, the company was focusing its production efforts in the Hollywood area. Universal Weekly and Moving Picture Weekly  were the alternating names of Universa's internal magazine that began publication in this era; the magazine was intended to market Universa's films to exhibitors.  Since much of Universa's early film output was destroyed in subsequent fires and nitrate degradation, the surviving issues of these magazines are a crucial source for film historians.  Universal advertisement touting the benefit of the studi's short films to theater operators  On March 15, 1915,  : 8 Laemmle opened the worl's largest motion picture production facility, Universal City Studios , on a 230-acre (0.9-km 2 ) converted farm just over the Cahuenga Pass from Hollywood.  Studio management became the third facet of Universa's operations, with the studio incorporated as a distinct subsidiary organization. Unlike other movie moguls, Laemmle opened his studio to tourists. Universal became the largest studio in Hollywood and remained so for a decade. However, it sought an audience mostly in small towns, producing mostly inexpensive melodramas , westerns , and serials . In 1916, Universal formed a three-tier branding system for their releases. Unlike the top-tier studios, Universal did not own any theaters to market its feature films. Universal branding their product gave theater owners and audiences a quick reference guide.  Branding would help theater owners judge films they were about to lease and help fans decide which movies they wanted to see. Universal released three different types of feature motion pictures:   Red Feather Photoplays – low-budget feature films Bluebird Photoplays – mainstream feature release and more ambitious productions Jewel – prestige motion pictures featuring high budgets using prominent actors Directors of "Jewel" films included Jack Conway , John Ford , Rex Ingram , Robert Z. Leonard , George Marshall , and Lois Weber , one of the few women directing films in Hollywood.  : 13 Starting in the mid-1920s, Universal branded its most expensive and heavily-promoted feature films as "Super-Jewel" productions. These included films such as Erich von Stroheim's Foolish Wives (1922), Clarence Brown's The Acquittal (1923), Hobart Henley's A Lady of Quality (1924), Harry A. Pollard's Uncle To's Cabin (1927), and Edward Sloman's Surrender (1928). Despite Laemml's role as an innovator, he was an extremely cautious studio chief. Unlike rivals Adolph Zukor , William Fox , and Marcus Loew , Laemmle chose not to develop a theater chain . He also financed all of his own films, refusing to take on debt. This policy nearly bankrupted the studio when actor-director Erich von Stroheim insisted on excessively lavish production values for his films Blind Husbands (1919) and Foolish Wives (1922), but Universal shrewdly gained a return on some of the expenditure by launching a sensational ad campaign that attracted moviegoers. Character actor Lon Chaney became a drawing card for Universal in the mid-1910s, appearing steadily in dramas. However, Chaney left Universal in 1917 because of a salary dispute, and his two biggest hits for Universal were made as isolated returns to the studio: The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1923) and The Phantom of the Opera (1925).  During the early 1920s Laemmle entrusted most of Universa's production policy decisions to Irving Thalberg . Thalberg had been Laemml's personal secretary, and Laemmle was impressed by his cogent observations of how efficiently the studio could be operated. Promoted to studio chief in 1919, Thalberg made distinct improvements of quality and prestige in Universa's output in addition to dealing with star director Erich von Stroheim's increasing inability to control the expense and length of his films, eventually firing Stroheim on October 6, 1922, six weeks into the production of Merry-Go-Round (1923) and replacing him with Rupert Julian . Louis B. Mayer lured Thalberg away from Universal in late 1922 to his own growing studio, Louis B. Mayer Productions , as vice-president in charge of production, and when Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer was formed in 1924 Thalberg continued in the same position for the new company. Without Thalber's guidance, Universal became a second-tier studio and would remain so for several decades. Share of the Deutsche Universal-Film AG, issued March 4, 1930 In 1926, Universal opened a production unit in Germany, Deutsche Universal-Film AG, under the direction of Joe Pasternak . This unit produced three to four films per year until 1936, migrating to Hungary and then Austria in the face of Hitler's increasing domination of central Europe. With the advent of sound, these productions were made in the German language or, occasionally, Hungarian or Polish. In the U.S., Universal Pictures did not distribute any of this subsidiar's films. Still, some of them were exhibited through other independent, foreign-language film distributors based in New York City without the benefit of English subtitles. Nazi persecution and a change in ownership for the parent Universal Pictures organization resulted in the dissolution of this subsidiary. In the early years, Universal had a "clean picture" policy. However, by April 1927, Carl Laemmle considered this a mistake as "unclean pictures" from other studios generated more profit while Universal lost money.  Oswald the Lucky Rabbit In early 1927, Universal had been negotiating deals with cartoon producers since they wanted to get back into producing them. On March 4, Charles Mintz signed a contract with Universal in the presence of its vice president, R. H. Cochrane. Mint's company, Winkler Pictures, was to produce 26 " Oswald the Lucky Rabbit " cartoons for Universal.  Walt Disney and Ub Iwerks created the character and the Walt Disney Studio provided the animation for the cartoons under Winkle's supervision. The films enjoyed a successful theatrical run, and Mintz would sign a contract with Universal ensuring three more years of Oswald cartoons.  However, after Mintz had unsuccessfully demanded that Disney accept a lower fee for producing the films, Mintz took most of Wal's animators to work at his own studio. Disney and Iwerks would create Mickey Mouse in secret while they finished the remaining Oswald films they were contractually obligated to finish. Universal subsequently severed its link to Mintz and formed its own in-house animation studio to produce Oswald cartoons headed by Walter Lantz , which would later result in the creation of Woody Woodpecker in 1940. In February 2006, NBCUniversal sold all the Disney-animated Oswald cartoons, along with the rights to the character himself, to The Walt Disney Company . In return, Disney released ABC sportscaster Al Michaels from his contract so he could work on NB's recently acquired Sunday night NFL football package . Universal retained ownership of the remaining Oswald cartoons. Keeping leadership of the studio in the family Logo version from 1931 Bela Lugosi in Dracula (1931) Boris Karloff in Bride of Frankenstein (1935) In 1928, Laemmle Sr. made his son, Carl Jr. , head of Universal Pictures, a 21st birthday present. Universal already had a reputation for nepotism —at one time, 70 of Carl Sr's relatives were supposedly on the payroll. Many of them were nephews, resulting in Carl Sr. being known around the studios as "Uncle Carl". Ogden Nash famously quipped in rhyme, "Uncle Carl Laemmle/Has a very large faemmle". Among these relatives was future Academy Award-winning director/producer William Wyler . "Junior," Laemmle persuaded his father to bring Universal up to date. He bought and built theaters, converted the studio to sound production, and made several forays into high-quality production. His early efforts included the critically panned part-talkie version of Edna Ferber's novel Show Boat (1929), the lavish musical Broadway (1929) which included Technicolor sequences; and the first all-color musical feature (for Universal), King of Jazz (1930). The more serious All Quiet on the Western Front (1930) won its yea's Best Picture Oscar . Laemmle Jr. created a niche for the studio, beginning a series of horror films which extended into the 1940s, affectionately dubbed Universal horror . Among them are Dracula (1931), Frankenstein (1931), The Mummy (1932) and The Invisible Man (1933). Other Laemmle productions of this period include Tay Garnett's Destination Unknown (1933), John M. Stahl's Imitation of Life (1934) and William Wyle's The Good Fairy (1935). The Laemmles lose control Universa's forays into high-quality production spelled the end of the Laemmle era at the studio. Taking on the task of modernizing and upgrading a film conglomerate in the depths of the Great Depression was risky, and for a time, Universal slipped into receivership . The theater chain was scrapped , but Carl Jr. held fast to distribution, studio, and production operations. The end for the Laemmles came with a lavish version of Show Boat (1936), a remake of its earlier 1929 part-talkie production, and produced as a high-quality, big-budget film rather than as a B-picture . The new film featured several stars from the Broadway stage version, which began production in late 1935, and unlike the 1929 film, was based on the Broadway musical rather than the novel. Carl Jr's spending habits alarmed company stockholders. They would not allow production to start on Show Boat unless the Laemmles obtained a loan. Universal was forced to seek a $750,000 production loan from the Standard Capital Corporation, pledging the Laemmle famil's controlling interest in Universal as collateral . It was the first time Universal had borrowed money for a production in its 26-year history. The production went $300,000 over budget; Standard called in the loan, cash-strapped Universal could not pay, and Standard foreclosed and seized control of the studio on April 2, 1936. Although Universa's 1936 Show Boat (released a little over a month later) became a critical and financial success, it was not enough to save the Laemmle' involvement with the studio. They were unceremoniously removed from the company they had founded. Because the Laemmles personally oversaw production, Show Boat was released (despite the takeover) with Carl Laemmle and Carl Laemmle Jr's names on the credits and in the fil's advertising campaign. Standard Capita's J. Cheever Cowdin had taken over as president and chairman of the board of directors and instituted severe cuts in production budgets. Joining him were British entrepreneurs C.M. Woolf and J. Arthur Rank , who bought a significant stake in the studio.  Gone were the big ambitions, and though Universal had a few big names under contract, those it had been cultivating, like William Wyler and Margaret Sullavan , left. Meanwhile, producer Joe Pasternak, who had been successfully producing light musicals with young sopranos for Universa's German subsidiary, repeated his formula in the United States. Teenage singer Deanna Durbin starred in Pasterna's first American film, Three Smart Girls (1936). The film was a box-office hit and reputedly resolved the studi's financial problems. The fil's success led Universal to offer her a contract, which for the first five years of her career, produced her most successful pictures. James Stewart and Marlene Dietrich in Destry Rides Again (1939) When Pasternak stopped producing Durbi's pictures, and she outgrew her screen persona and pursued more dramatic roles, the studio signed 13-year-old Gloria Jean for her own series of Pasternak musicals from 1939; she went on to star with Bing Crosby , W. C. Fields , and Donald 'Connor . A popular Universal film of the late 1930s was Destry Rides Again (1939), starring James Stewart as Destry and Marlene Dietrich in her comeback role after leaving Paramount . By the early 1940s, the company was concentrating on lower-budget productions that were the compan's main staple: westerns, melodramas, serials, and sequels to the studi's horror pictures, the latter now solely B pictures. The studio fostered many series: The Dead End Kids and Little Tough Guys action features and serials (1938–43); the comic adventures of infant Baby Sandy (1938–41); comedies with Hugh Herbert (1938–42) and The Ritz Brothers (1940–43); musicals with Robert Paige , Jane Frazee , The Andrews Sisters , and The Merry Macs (1938–45); and westerns with Tom Mix (1932–33), Buck Jones (1933–36), Bob Baker (1938–39), Johnny Mack Brown (1938–43); Rod Cameron (1944–45), and Kirby Grant (1946–47). Universal could seldom afford its own stable of stars and often borrowed talent from other studios or hired freelance actors. In addition to Stewart and Dietrich, Margaret Sullavan and Bing Crosby were two of the major names that made a couple of pictures for Universal during this period. Some stars came from radio, including Edgar Bergen , W. C. Fields , and the comedy team of Abbott and Costello ( Bud Abbott and Lou Costello ). Abbott and Costell's military comedy Buck Privates (1941) gave the former burlesque comedians a national and international profile. During the war years, Universal did have a co-production arrangement with producer Walter Wanger and his partner, director Fritz Lang , lending the studio some amount of prestige productions. Universa's core audience base was still found in the neighborhood movie theaters , and the studio continued to please the public with low- to medium-budget films. Basil Rathbone and Nigel Bruce in new Sherlock Holmes mysteries (1942–46), teenage musicals with Gloria Jean , Donald 'Connor , and Peggy Ryan (1942–43), and screen adaptations of radi's Inner Sanctum Mysteries with Lon Chaney Jr. (1943–45). Alfred Hitchcock was also borrowed for two films from Selznick International Pictures : Saboteur (1942) and Shadow of a Doubt (1943). As Universa's main product had always been lower-budgeted films, it was one of the last major studios to contract with Technicolor . The studio did not make use of the three-strip Technicolor process until Arabian Nights (1942), starring Jon Hall and Maria Montez . Technicolor was also used for the studi's remake of their 1925 horror melodrama, Phantom of the Opera (1943) with Claude Rains and Nelson Eddy . With the success of their first two pictures, a regular schedule of high-budget Technicolor films followed. Universal International and Decca Records In 1945, J. Arthur Rank, who had already owned a stake in the studio almost a decade before, hoping to expand his American presence, bought into a four-way merger with Universal, the independent company International Pictures , and producer Kenneth Young. The new combine, United World Pictures, was a failure and was dissolved within one year. However, Rank and International remained interested in Universal, culminating in the studi's reorganization as Universal-International; the merger was announced on July 30, 1946.  William Goetz , a founder of International along with Leo Spitz , was made head of production at the renamed Universal International Pictures , a subsidiary of Universal Pictures Company, Inc. which also served as an import-export subsidiary, and copyright holder for the production ar's films. Goetz, a son-in-law of Louis B. Mayer , decided to bring "prestige" to the new company. He stopped the studi's low-budget production of B movies , serials and curtailed Universa's horror and " Arabian Nights " cycles. He also reduced the studi's output from its wartime average of fifty films per year (nearly twice the major studi's output) to thirty-five films a year.  Distribution and copyright control remained under the name of Universal Pictures Company Inc. Universal International Studio, 1955 Goetz set out an ambitious schedule. Universal-International became responsible for the American distribution of Ran's British productions, including such classics as David Lean's Great Expectations (1946) and Laurence Olivier's Hamlet (1948). Broadening its scope further, Universal-International branched out into the lucrative non-theatrical field, buying a majority stake in home-movie dealer Castle Films in 1947 and taking the company over entirely in 1951. For three decades, Castle would offer "highlights" reels from the Universal film library to home-movie enthusiasts and collectors. Goetz licensed Universa's pre–Universal-International film library to Jack Broede's Realart Pictures for cinema re-release, but Realart was not allowed to show the films on television. The production arm of the studio still struggled. While there were to be a few hits like The Killers (1946) and The Naked City (1948), Universal-Internationa's new theatrical films often met with disappointing response at the box office. By the late 1940s, Goetz was out. The studio returned to low-budget and series films such as Ma and Pa Kettle (1949), a spin-off of the studi's 1947 hit The Egg and I and the inexpensive Francis (1950), the first film of a series about a talking mule, became mainstays of the company. Once again, the films of Abbott and Costello, including Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein (1948), were among the studi's top-grossing productions. But at this point, Rank lost interest and sold his shares to the investor Milton Rackmil , whose Decca Records would take full control of Universal in 1952. Besides Abbott and Costello, the studio retained the Walter Lantz cartoon studio, whose product was released with Universal-Internationa's films. In the 1950s, Universal-International resumed their series of Arabian Nights films, many starring Tony Curtis . The studio also had success with monster and science fiction films produced by William Alland , with many directed by Jack Arnold and starring John Agar . Other successes were the melodramas directed by Douglas Sirk and produced by Ross Hunter , which were critically reassessed more positively years later. Among Universal-Internationa's stable of stars were Rock Hudson , Tony Curtis , Jeff Chandler , Audie Murphy , and John Gavin . Although Decca would continue to keep picture budgets lean, it was favored by changing circumstances in the film business, as other studios let their contract actors go in the wake of the 1948 U.S. vs. Paramount Pictures, et al. decision. Leading actors were increasingly free to work where and when they chose, and in 1950 MCA agent Lew Wasserman made a deal with Universal for his client James Stewart that would change the rules of the business. Wasserma's deal gave Stewart a share in the profits of three pictures in lieu of a large salary. When one of those films, Winchester'73 (1950), proved to be a hit, the arrangement would become the rule for many future productions at Universal and eventually at other studios as well. MCA takes over Ceremonial gate to Universal Studios Hollywood (the theme park attached to the studio lot) In the early 1950s, Universal set up its own distribution company in France . In the late 1960s, the company also started a production company in Paris , Universal Productions France S.A. , although sometimes credited by the name of the distribution company, Universal Pictures France . Except for the two first films it produced, Claude Chabrol's Le scandale (English title The Champagne Murders , 1967) and Romain Gary's Les oiseaux vont mourir au Pérou (English title Birds in Peru ), it was only involved in French or other European co-productions, including Louis Malle's Lacombe, Lucien , Bertrand Blier's Les Valseuses (English title Going Places , 1974), and Fred Zinnemann's The Day of the Jackal (1973). It was only involved in approximately 20 French film productions. In the early 1970s, the unit was incorporated into the French Cinema International Corporation arm. By the late 1950s, the motion picture business was again changing. The combination of the studio/theater-chain breakup and the rise of television saw the reduced audience size for cinema productions. The Music Corporation of America (MCA), the worl's largest talent agency, had also become a powerful television producer, renting space at Republic Studios for its Revue Productions subsidiary. After a period of complete shutdown, a moribund Universal agreed to sell its 360-acre (1.5 km 2 ) studio lot to MCA in 1958 for $11 million, renamed Revue Studios . MCA owned the studio lot, but not Universal Pictures, yet was increasingly influential on Universa's products. The studio lot was upgraded and modernized, while MCA clients like Doris Day , Lana Turner , Cary Grant , and director Alfred Hitchcock were signed to Universal contracts. The long-awaited takeover of Universal Pictures by MCA, Inc. happened in mid-1962 as part of the MCA- Decca Records merger. The company reverted in name to Universal Pictures from Universal-International. As a final gesture before leaving the talent agency business, virtually every MCA client was signed to a Universal contract. In 1964, MCA formed Universal City Studios, Inc ., merging the motion pictures and television arms of Universal Pictures Company and Revue Productions (officially renamed as Universal Television in 1966). And so, with MCA in charge, Universal became a full-blown, A-film movie studio, with leading actors and directors under contract; offering slick, commercial films; and a studio tour subsidiary launched in 1964. Television production made up much of the studi's output, with Universal heavily committed, in particular, to deals with NBC (which much later merged with Universal to form NBC Universal; see below ) providing up to half of all prime time shows for several seasons. An innovation during this period championed by Universal was the made-for-television movie. In 1982, Universal became the studio base for many shows that were produced by Norman Lear's Tandem Productions / Embassy Television , including Dif'rent Strokes , One Day at a Time , The Jeffersons , The Facts of Life , and Silver Spoons which premiered on NBC that same fall. At this time, Hal B. Wallis , who had recently worked as a major producer at Paramount, moved over to Universal, where he produced several films, among them a lavish version of Maxwell Anderson's Anne of the Thousand Days (1969) and the equally lavish Mary, Queen of Scots (1971).  Although neither could claim to be a big financial hit, both films received Academy Award nominations, and Anne was nominated for Best Picture , Best Actor ( Richard Burton ), Best Actress ( Geneviève Bujold ), and Best Supporting Actor ( Anthony Quayle ). Wallis retired from Universal after making the film Rooster Cogburn (1975), a sequel to True Grit (1969), which Wallis had produced at Paramount. Rooster Cogburn co-starred John Wayne , reprising his Oscar-winning role from the earlier film, and Katharine Hepburn , their only film together. The film was only a moderate success. In 1983, Universal Pictures launched an independent film arm designed to release specialty films, Universal Classics, and the division has sights on separation.  In 1987, Universal Pictures, MGM/UA Communications Co. , and Paramount Pictures teamed up to market feature film and television products to China. Consumer reach was measured in terms of the 25 billion admission tickets that were clocked in China in 1986, and Worldwide Media Sales, a division of the New York-based Worldwide Media Group, had been placed in charge of the undertaking.  In the early 1980s, the company had its own pay television arm Universal Pay Television (a.k.a. Universal Pay TV Programming, Inc.), which spawned in 1987, an 11-picture cable television agreement with then-independent film studio New Line Cinema .  In the early 1970s, Universal teamed up with Paramount to form Cinema International Corporation , which distributed films by Paramount and Universal outside of the US and Canada. Although Universal did produce occasional hits, among them Airport (1970), The Sting (1973), American Graffiti (also 1973), Earthquake (1974), and a big box-office success which restored the compan's fortunes: Jaws (1975), Universal during the decade was primarily a television studio. When Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer purchased United Artists in 1981, MGM could not drop out of the CIC venture to merge with United Artists overseas operations. However, with future film productions from both names being released through the MGM/UA Entertainment plate, CIC decided to merge U's international units with MGM and reformed as United International Pictures . There would be other film hits like Smokey and the Bandit (1977), Animal House (1978), The Jerk (1979), The Blues Brothers (1980), The Four Seasons (1981), E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial (1982), The Breakfast Club (1985), Back to the Future (also 1985), An American Tail (1986), The Land Before Time (1988), Field of Dreams (1989), Jurassic Park (1993) and Casper (1995), but the film business was financially unpredictable with some films like Scarface (1983), Dune (1984) or Waterworld (1995), which turned out to be big box office disappointments despite their high budget. UIP began distributing films by start-up studio DreamWorks in 1997 due to the founder' connections with Paramount, Universal, and Amblin Entertainment. In 2001, MGM dropped out of the UIP venture and went with 20th Century Fox's international arm to handle the distribution of their titles, an ongoing arrangement. UIP nearly lost its connection with Universal Pictures in 1999 when Universal started Universal Pictures International to take over the assets of PolyGram Filmed Entertainment and wanted UPI to distribute their films starting in 2001.  Only a small handful of films were released theatrically by Universal Pictures International, up until the release of the film Mickey Blue Eyes . UIP then took over the theatrical distribution inventory of future films planned to be released by Universal Pictures International, such as The Green Mile and Angel's Ashes .  On October 4, 1999, Universal renewed its commitments to United International Pictures to release its films internationally through 2006.   Matsushita, Seagram and Vivendi Logo used from 1996 to 2012, still used on some properties, such as the independent company, Universal Music Group Anxious to expand the compan's broadcast and cable presence, longtime MCA head Lew Wasserman sought a rich partner. He located Japanese electronics manufacturer Matsushita Electric (now known as Panasonic ), which agreed to acquire MCA for $6.6 billion in 1990. On December 9, 1996, the new owners dropped the MCA name; the company became Universal Studios, Inc.  and become the parent company of Universal Pictures, while Universal Pictures become a division. MC's music division, MCA Music Entertainment Group, was renamed Universal Music Group . MCA Records continued to live on as a label within the Universal Music Group. The following year, G. P. Putna's Sons was sold to the Penguin Group subsidiary of Pearson PLC . Afterward, Universal Pictures acquired the United States distribution rights of several of StudioCana's films, such as David Lynch's Mulholland Drive (2001) and Brotherhood of the Wolf (2001) which became the sixth-highest-grossing French-language film of all time in the United States.   Universal Pictures and StudioCanal also co-produced several films, such as Love Actually (2003); a $40 million-budgeted film that eventually grossed $246 million worldwide.  In late 2000, the New York Film Academy was permitted to use the Universal Studios backlot for student film projects in an unofficial partnership.  Expansions In September 2013, Adam Fogelson was ousted as co-chairman of Universal Pictures, promoting Donna Langley to the sole chairperson. In addition, NBCUniversal International chairman Jeff Shell would be appointed as chairman of the newly created Filmed Entertainment Group. Longtime studio head Ron Meyer would give up oversight of the film studio and appointed vice chairman of NBCUniversal, providing consultation to CEO Steve Burke on all of the compan's operations. Meyer retained oversight of Universal Parks and Resorts.  Universa's multi-year film financing deal with Elliott Management expired in 2013.  In summer 2013, Universal made an agreement with Thomas Tull's Legendary Pictures to distribute their films for five years starting in 2014 (the year that Legendar's similar agreement with Warner Bros. Pictures ended).  In June 2014, Universal Partnerships took over licensing consumer products for NBC and Sprout with the expectation that all licensing would eventually be centralized within NBCUniversal.  In May 2015, Gramercy Pictures was revived by Focus Features as a genre label concentrating on action, sci-fi, and horror films.  On December 16, 2015, Amblin Partners announced that it entered into a five-year distribution deal with Universal Pictures by which the films will be distributed and marketed by either Universal or Focus Features .   In early 2016, Perfect World Pictures announced a long-term co-financing deal with Universal, representing the first time a Chinese company directly invests in a multi-year slate deal with a major U.S. studio.  On April 28, 2016, Universa's parent company, NBCUniversal, announced a $3.8 billion deal to buy DreamWorks Animation .  On August 22, 2016, the deal was completed.  Universal took over the distribution deal with DreamWorks Animation starting in 2019 with the release of How to Train Your Dragon: The Hidden World , after DreamWorks Animatio's distribution deal with 20th Century Fox ended. On February 15, 2017, Universal Pictures acquired a minority stake in Amblin Partners, strengthening the relationship between Universal and Amblin.  In December 2019, Universal Pictures entered early negotiations to distribute upcoming feature film properties based on the Lego toys. Although the original Lego Movie characters are still owned by Warner Bros. Pictures , Universal Pictures will serve as a distributor of future releases and will develop additional Lego films. The future of the already in-development films is believed to remain the same.  In June, it was announced longtime Universal International Distribution President Duncan Clark would be stepping down. He would transition to a consulting role with the studio in August and would be replaced by Veronika Kwan Vandenberg.  Units Universal Pictures International Universal International Distribution Universal Pictures Home Entertainment Universal Home Entertainment Productions Universal 1440 Entertainment DreamWorks Animation Home Entertainment Universal Sony Pictures Home Entertainment Australia (joint venture with Sony Pictures Home Entertainment ) Universal Playback Studio Distribution Services (joint venture with Warner Bros. Discovery Home Entertainment ) Focus Features Universal Pictures International Entertainment NBCUniversal Entertainment Japan Working Title Films WT 2 Productions Working Title Television Carnival Films Rede Telecine (12.5%, joint venture with Canais Globo , Walt Disney Studios , Paramount Pictures and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer ) Illumination Illumination Studios Paris Illumination Labs Moonlight DreamWorks Animation DreamWorks Animation Television DreamWorks Classics Big Idea Entertainment (in-name-only unit of DreamWorks Animation) Bullwinkle Studios (JV) Harvey Entertainment (in-name-only unit of DreamWorks Animation) DreamWorks Theatricals DreamWorks New Media DreamWorksTV DreamWorks Press OTL Releasing Back Lot Music Universal Products & Experiences United International Pictures (50%, joint venture with Paramount Global's Paramount Pictures ) Amblin Partners (minor stake)   (JV)  Amblin Entertainment Amblin Television DreamWorks Pictures Storyteller Distribution  Blumhouse Holdings, LLC (minority stake with Jason Blum and James Wan )  Blumhouse Productions Atomic Monster BH Tilt (with Neon ) BlumHansonAllen Films Blumhouse Books Blumhouse Games Blumhouse International Blumhouse Television (55%) Haunted Movies Film library Main article: Lists of Universal Pictures films In addition to its own library, Universal releases the EMKA, Ltd. catalog of 1929–1949 Paramount Pictures , owned by sister company Universal Television . Film series Highest-grossing films Universal was the first studio to have released three billion-dollar films in one year; this distinction was achieved in 2015 with Furious 7 , Jurassic World , and Minions .  ‡ Includes theatrical reissue(s). See also DreamWorks Woody Woodpecker

2024 film by Gil Kenan Ghostbusters: Frozen Empire is a 2024 American supernatural comedy film directed by Gil Kenan from a screenplay he co-wrote with Jason Reitman . It is the sequel to Ghostbusters: Afterlife (2021), the fourth mainline installment, and the fifth film overall in the Ghostbusters franchise . The film stars Paul Rudd , Carrie Coon , Finn Wolfhard , Mckenna Grace , Celeste 'Connor , and Logan Kim reprising their roles from Afterlife , alongside Bill Murray , Dan Aykroyd , Ernie Hudson , Annie Potts , and William Atherton reprising their characters from the earlier films. Kumail Nanjiani , Patton Oswalt , Emily Alyn Lind , and James Acaster also join the cast. Set three years after the events of Afterlife , the veteran Ghostbusters must join forces with their recruits to save the world from a death-chilling god in New York City who seeks to build a spectral army.  Following the success of Afterlife , Sony Pictures announced the sequel in April 2022, with Reitman returning as director. Co-writer and executive producer Kenan later took over as director that December, with Reitman staying on as a co-writer and co-producer. That same month, Rudd, Coon, Grace, Wolfhard, 'Connor, Kim, Murray, Aykroyd, Hudson, Potts and Atherton were all confirmed to reprise their roles. New cast members including Nanjiani, Oswalt, Lind, and Acaster were announced in March 2023, with principal photography commencing that month and wrapping in June. Dario Marianelli was hired to compose the fil's score, replacing Afterlife composer Rob Simonsen . This is the first film in the Ghostbusters franchise to be released following the death of the franchis's co-creator and Jason Reitma's father Ivan Reitman , who posthumously receives credit as a producer alongside his son and Jason Blumenfeld. The film is dedicated to Reitma's memory and celebrates the 40th anniversary of the first film .  Ghostbusters: Frozen Empire had its world premiere at the AMC 13 Theater at Lincoln Square in New York City on March 14, 2024,  and was released in the United States on March 22, by Sony Pictures Releasing under its Columbia Pictures label.  The film received mixed reviews from critics, but generally positive feedback from audiences,  and has grossed over $201 million worldwide. Plot [ edit ] Three years after the events in Summerville, Oklahoma,  Callie Spengler, her boyfriend Gary Grooberson, her children Trevor and Phoebe, and their close friends Lucky Domingo and Podcast, relocate to New York City to aid Winston Zeddemore and Ray Stantz in reestablishing the Ghostbusters. After the group captures a ghost from Hel's Kitchen in Lower Manhattan , Walter Peck , the Ghostbuster' long-time opponent, threatens to close them down with his authority as mayor. To appease Peck, Callie removes underage Phoebe from the team. Upset, the teen attempts to control her emotions by playing chess in a nearby park, where she encounters and befriends Melody, a teenage gir's ghost who died in a fire. Meanwhile, Ray and Podcast are collecting cursed objects for examination. Nadeem Razmaadi visits and sells them a strange brass orb with ritual markings written in Mesopotamian Arabic inherited from his grandmother. Ray suspects it is an apotropaic trap due to copper alloys typically being used in rituals against the supernatural since the Bronze Age . When Ray evaluates its PKE levels, the orb immediately emits broad-spectrum psionic energy. A cold wave travels from the orb to the Ghostbuster' firehouse headquarters and damages the ecto-containment unit, which is almost at capacity. Winston takes the orb to his privately owned paranormal research center, run by Dr. Lars Pinfield. Using an experimental extraction device, he is unable to extract any spiritual energy from it. The or's captive psychically sabotages one of the cente's ecto-confinements, allowing a ghost to escape and hide in Podcas's equipment. To learn more, Lars joins Trevor and Lucky to see Nadeem, who reveals that the orb was kept hidden by his grandmother within a brass-lined chamber. Peter Venkman , brought in to help, discovers Nadeem has latent pyrokinetic powers . Meanwhile Ray, accompanied by Phoebe and Podcast, visits Dr. Hubert Wartzki, a New York Public Library research librarian. Wartzki explains the orb was built over 4,000 years ago in Southwest Asia by four sorcerers called the Firemasters to imprison Garraka, a phantom god who sought to conquer the world with an undead army who would use "Kusharit Umoti" – "the power to kill by fear itself." Nadee's grandmother belonged to the lineage of Firemasters, one of whom prevented Garraka from escaping the orb in 1904 during a mock ritual conducted by members of the Manhattan Adventurer' Society, whom he froze to death. Garraka was confined in the orb due to being vulnerable to brass. This, combined with fire, and the removal of his horns trapped him within the orb. When the trio attempts to stop the escaped ghost from stealing a phonographic recording of the clu's ritual, Peck exploits Phoeb's involvement to shut down the Ghostbusters. After an argument with Gary and her mother, Phoebe runs away and takes Melody to Winsto's research center. She uses his extraction equipment to project herself as a ghost for two minutes so the pair can physically interact. Melody reveals she had been secretly working with Garraka, who has offered her passage to the afterlife. By controlling Phoeb's disembodied spirit, Garraka forces her physical body to recite the ritual chant. He then escapes, locates his horns, and begins freezing the city. Realizing Garraka will free the ghosts in the containment unit after freeing ones from the center, the Ghostbusters gather to defend their headquarters. They are aided by Nadeem, who dons the Firemaster brass armor kept by his grandmother and attempts to master his powers. Garraka overpowers them and breaches the containment unit. Phoebe electroplates Egon Spengler's proton pack with brass to strengthen it; Melody, betrayed by Garraka, atones by helping Nadeem utilize his powers to weaken Garraka. Ray, with help from his fellow veteran Ghostbusters captures Garraka by improvising the ruptured containment unit as a giant trap. Melody reconciles with Phoebe before departing for the afterlife to reunite with her family. As the city thaws, the Ghostbusters are hailed as heroes again, with Peck forced to support the team and reinstate Phoebe. The Ghostbusters begin pursuing escaped ghosts across New York City. In a mid-credits scene , a trucker gets out of his Stay-Puft Marshmallows branded truck to make a purchase from a vending machine, while the Mini-Pufts steal his vehicle in his absence. Cast [ edit ] Main article: List of Ghostbusters characters Paul Rudd as Gary Grooberson Carrie Coon as Callie Spengler Finn Wolfhard as Trevor Spengler Mckenna Grace as Phoebe Spengler Kumail Nanjiani as Nadeem Razmaadi  Patton Oswalt as Dr. Hubert Wartzki  Celeste 'Connor as Lucky Domingo Logan Kim as Podcast  Emily Alyn Lind as Melody James Acaster as Dr. Lars Pinfield  Bill Murray as Dr. Peter Venkman  Dan Aykroyd as Dr. Raymond "Ray" Stantz  Ernie Hudson as Dr. Winston Zeddemore  Annie Potts as Janine Melnitz  William Atherton as Mayor Walter Peck  Additionally, Kevin Mangold and Ian Whyte serve as the puppeteers for Slimer and Garraka, respectively, though the latte's voice performers were uncredited. Shelby Young and Ryan Bartley also appear uncredited as the voices of the Mini-Pufts, tiny versions and replicated forms of the Stay Puft Marshmallow Man , with Young returning from Afterlife .  Production [ edit ] Development [ edit ] Following the release of Ghostbusters: Afterlife in November 2021, Dan Aykroyd expressed interest in having the surviving cast of the original Ghostbusters team reprise their roles in up to three sequels.  In April 2022, it was announced that a sequel to Afterlife was in early development at Sony Pictures .   In June 2022, the film was confirmed by director Jason Reitman under the working title Firehouse .  That same month, it was announced that the sequel would take place in New York City .  On October 5, 2022, Mckenna Grace announced that she would reprise her role.  The following month, Ernie Hudson revealed he had read a script for the film.  In December 2022, it was announced that Gil Kenan would take over as director from Reitman, who remained as a writer and producer. It was also announced that Paul Rudd , Finn Wolfhard and Carrie Coon would return.  In March 2023, it was announced that Kumail Nanjiani , Patton Oswalt , James Acaster and Emily Alyn Lind had been cast in the film.  Lin's role was established in secrecy during pre-production. She met Reitman, Kenan, and casting director John Papsidera , and was not aware that she had the role until shortly before filming.  According to Nanjiani, the filmmakers drew inspiration from the animated series The Real Ghostbusters (1986–1991), noting they "wanted to make a long episode of the animated series".  Instead of a Motorola MT-500 as seen in previous iterations, the controversial Baofeng UV-5R ham radio was used as a prop.  [ relevant? ] Filming [ edit ] Principal photography began on March 20, 2023, in London ,  under the working title Firehouse , with Eric Steelberg serving as the cinematographer.   On April 25, 2023, Hudson indicated that Aykroyd, Murray and Potts would reprise their roles from previous Ghostbusters movies in the film;  Aykroyd confirmed he would return for the sequel in June 2023.  Filming was spotted in New York City, where Casey Neistat was caught filming a stunt scene in a video posted on June 7, 2023, while documenting the effects of the 2023 Canadian wildfires in New York City.  Filming wrapped on June 23.  Music [ edit ] Further information: Ghostbusters: Frozen Empire (soundtrack) On January 18, 2024, Dario Marianelli was confirmed to compose the fil's score, replacing Afterlife composer Rob Simonsen . This marked Marianell's second collaboration with Kenan after A Boy Called Christmas (2021). He recorded his score on the Barbra Streisand Scoring Stage in the John Williams Music Building on the Sony Pictures Studios lot in Culver City.  The original fil's composer Elmer Bernstein's son, Peter Bernstein , returned as score consultant, after doing so for Afterlife .  In addition to using some of the elder Bernstei's original scores on some of the fil's scenes, the song " Ghostbusters ", which was performed by Ray Parker Jr. , is heard during the fil's end credits. Other songs " Home on the Range ", arranged by Kenan and Reitman, "Melano" by Caino x Jun R.O.T., and " Love Is Strange " by Mickey & Sylvia are used in the film. On March 7, 2024, Japanese girl group Atarashii Gakko! released a track called "Ghostbusters: Frozen Summer" as a collaboration with Sony Pictures Entertainment Japan .  Release [ edit ] Marketing [ edit ] On November 8, 2023, Sony released the first teaser trailer, which officially revealed the title as Ghostbusters: Frozen Empire , as well as revealing the synopsis for the film.  Theatrical [ edit ] Ghostbusters: Frozen Empire was scheduled to be released on December 20, 2023,   but was delayed due to the SAG-AFTRA strike and rescheduled for March 29, 2024 (taking over the original release date of Sony Pictures Animation's Spider-Man: Beyond the Spider-Verse ).  The film had its world premiere in New York City on March 14, 2024,  and was released by Sony Pictures Releasing on March 22, 2024.  Home media [ edit ] In April 2021, Sony signed deals with Netflix and Disney for the rights to their 2022 to 2026 film slate, following the fil's theatrical and home media windows. Netflix signed for exclusive "pay 1 window" streaming rights, which is typically an 18-month window, and included Ghostbusters: Frozen Empire and past Ghostbusters films. Disney signed for "pay 2 windows" rights for the films, which would be streamed on Disney+ and/or Hulu as well as broadcast on Disne's linear television networks.  Ghostbusters: Frozen Empire was released digitally on May 7, 2024,  and on 4K Blu-ray , Blu-ray , and DVD on June 25, 2024.  Ghostbusters: Frozen Empire will be stream on Netflix in the US from July 22, 2024.  Reception [ edit ] Box office [ edit ] As of June 20, 2024  , Ghostbusters: Frozen Empire has grossed $113.4 million in the United States and Canada and $88.4 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $201.8 million.   In the United States and Canada, Ghostbusters: Frozen Empire was released alongside Immaculate and Late Night with the Devil , and was projected to gross $43–45 million from 4,345 theaters in its opening weekend.  The film made $16 million on its first day, including $4.7 million from Thursday night previews, slightly topping Afterlife' s $4.5 million. It went on to debut at $45 million, landing between the opening weekends of Ghostbusters ($46 million in 2016) and Afterlife ($44 million in 2021), topping the box office, and pushing the Ghostbusters franchise past the $1 billion mark. Deadline Hollywood credited Son's marketing efforts for boosting the opening weekend, but suggested that the franchise would perform better if it returned to the original movi's focus on "wall-to-wall humor" and "big comedy stars."  In its second weekend the film made $15.7 million (a drop of 65%), finishing second behind newcomer Godzilla x Kong: The New Empire .  Critical response [ edit ] On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , 42% of 291 critic' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 5.2/10. The websit's consensus reads: " Ghostbusters: Frozen Empire offers a certain amount of nostalgia-fueled fun for fans of the original, but a crowded cast and surprisingly serious tone prevent this sequel from truly sparking."  It is the lowest-rated installment in the franchise on the site.  Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned the film a score of 46 out of 100, based on 50 critics, indicating "mixed or average" reviews.  Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B+" on an A+ to F scale, while those polled by PostTrak gave it an 80% overall positive score, with 64% saying they would recommend the film.  Jake Wilson of The Age gave it 2.5/5 stars, writing: "Aykroyd and Grace are the soul of the thing, to whatever degree a soul exists. At this point, Aykroyd has shed any pretense of ironic distance, emerging as the mournful weirdo he surely always was."  CNN's Brian Lowry called it "a very busy movie that lacks the emotional hook of its predecessor while spending too much time on the wrong characters in a way that yields a rather lifeless, chilly affair."  Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film three stars out of four, writing that it "carries the same endearingly goofy, science-nerd spirit of the first film and delivers a delightful balance of slimy ghost stuff, sharp one-liners, terrific VFX and a steady stream of callbacks to various characters, human and otherwise, from the 1984 movie."  Jake Coyle of the Associated Press gave it 2.5/4 stars, saying that it was "A significant upgrade from Afterlife " and "a breezier, more serviceable sequel that has a modest charm as an'80-tinged family adventure."  Accolades [ edit ] Future [ edit ] In February 2024, Kenan revealed that ideas for multiple future films in the Ghostbusters franchise had been discussed.   Kenan specifically mentioned the Mini-Pufts storyline as something he and Reitman would like to expand upon. The Mini-Pufts are featured in the fil's post-credits scene.

American television and film studio Sony Pictures Entertainment Inc. (commonly known as Sony Pictures or SPE , and formerly known as Columbia Pictures Entertainment, Inc. ) is an American diversified multinational mass media and entertainment studio conglomerate that produces, acquires, and distributes filmed entertainment (theatrical motion pictures, television programs, and recorded videos) through multiple platforms. Through an intermediate holding company called Sony Film Holding Inc., it is operated as a subsidiary of Sony Entertainment Inc. , which is itself a subsidiary of the multinational technology and media conglomerate Sony Group Corporation .   Based at the Sony Pictures Studios lot in Culver City, California as one of the "Big Five" major American film studios , it encompasses Son's motion picture , television production and distribution units. All of SP's divisions are members of the Motion Picture Association (MPA).  Son's film franchises include The Karate Kid , Ghostbusters , Jumanji , Men in Black , Spider-Man , and Son's Spider-Man Universe . History [ edit ] 1987–1989 [ edit ] On September 1, 1987, The Coca-Cola Company announced plans to spin off Columbia Pictures , which it had owned since 1982. Under this arrangement, Coca-Cola would sell its entertainment assets (Coca-Col's Entertainment Business Sector) to TriStar Pictures , of which it owned 39.6%. Tri-Star would be renamed Columbia Pictures Entertainment, Inc. (CPE), with Coca-Cola owning 49%, its shareholders owning 31%, and Tri-Sta's shareholders owning 20%.   As part of a merger plan, the two television businesses, comprising Columbia/Embassy Television and Tri-Star Television , merged altogether to form a new incarnation of the original Columbia Pictures Television .  The merger enabled three top Tri-Star executives, namely Arnold Messner, who ran Tri-Star Telecommunications , Victor A. Kaufman, who ran the main Tri-Star Pictures studio, and Scott Siegler , who ran Tri-Star Television to stay on, while four of the Coca-Cola Entertainment Business Sector departed, namely Barbara Corday , who ran Columbia / Embassy Television as president, Herman Rush and Peter Seale, who ran Coca-Cola Telecommunications , and Brian McGrath, who was the president of the Coca-Cola Entertainment Business Sector.  In early December 1987, former Coke EBS vice president Kenneth Lemberger exited the post to join Tri-Star Pictures , displacing Roger Faxon, who had joined Columbia Pictures as senior vice president of the studio.  The merger was approved by shareholders on December 15, 1987, and it was completed two days later. Columbia and Tri-Star brands would be used as separate and autonomous production entities, and would be part of CPE whole, along with the prior assets, units and commitments of the former Coca-Cola Entertainment Business Sector, which included all feature, TV, home video, and pay cable operations as well as the Entertainment Secto's feature production deal with Nelson Entertainment and its investment in Castle Rock Entertainment , and TeleVentures ; a company it continues to own, which was linked to three independent companies: Tri-Star Pictures , Stephen J. Cannell Productions and Witt/Thomas Productions . Merv Griffin Enterprises continue to function as a separate operation.  A new company was formed in early 1988 with the Tri-Star name to take over the studi's operations.  In early January 1988, CPE announced that they would revive the Triumph branding for the new worldwide subsidiary, Triumph Releasing Corporation , which was functioned as a theatrical distributor, marketing and promotion for Columbia and Tri-Star films, and named Patrick N. Williamson as president of the unit and the company provided administrative services related to distribution of its films in North America, while internationally, would be responsible for the direction of each studio.  On September 28, 1989, Sony obtained an option to purchase all of The Coca-Cola Company's stock (approximately 54 million shares or 49% of the outstanding shares) in CPE for $27 per share.  The next day, Sony also announced that it reached an agreement with Guber-Peters Entertainment Company, Inc. (NASDAQ: GPEC; formerly Barris Industries , Inc.) to acquire CPE for $200 million when Sony hired Peter Guber and Jon Peters to be its co-chairmen.  This was all led by Norio Ohga , who was the president and CEO of Sony during that time.  The hiring of Guber and Peters by Sony to run Columbia was conflicted by a previous contract the producers had signed at Warner Bros. Time Warner's chairman, Steve Ross , threatened Sony with a lawsuit for breach of contract . The lawsuit would be subsequently dropped when Sony sold half-interest in Columbia House and cable distribution rights to Columbi's feature films, TV movies, and miniseries to Warner Bros. That same agreement also saw Columbia sell its 35% interest in the Burbank Studios and acquired Lorimar Studios , previously the MGM lot, from Warner Bros.   On October 31, 1989, Sony completed a friendly takeover bid for the rest of shares (51%) of CPE, which was a public company listed on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE: KPE), and acquired 99.3% of the common stock of the company. On November 8, 1989, Sony completed the acquisition by a "short-form" merger of its wholly owned subsidiary Sony Columbia Acquisition Corporation into CPE under the Delaware General Corporation Law . Sony also completed a tender offer for shares of common stock of the Guber-Peters Entertainment Company on November 6, 1989, and acquired the company 3 days later. The acquisition cost Sony $4.9 billion ($3.55 billion for shares and $1.4 billion of long-term debt) and was backed (financed) by five major Japanese banks Mitsui , Tokyo , Fuji , Mitsubishi and Industrial Bank of Japan .    1990–1999 [ edit ] The company was renamed as Sony Pictures Entertainment on August 7, 1991.   Also that year, Jon Peters left Columbia to start Peters Entertainment with a three-year exclusive production agreement at the studio at first, before transitioning to a non-exclusive deal at the studio.  Longtime CPE employee Laurie MacDonald also left to start Aerial Pictures at the studio, first for a two-year deal, before going to 20th Century Fox in 1993, and being swallowed up by Amblin Entertainment later that year, eventually setting up DreamWorks .  Sony has since created numerous other film production and distribution units, such as creating Sony Pictures Classics for art-house fare, by forming Columbia TriStar Pictures (also known as the Columbia TriStar Motion Picture Group) by merging Columbia Pictures and TriStar Pictures in 1998, revitalizing Columbi's former television division Screen Gems. This in effect re-united the MGM studio name, with the MGM main studio lot, although somewhat confusingly, the bulk of the pre-May 1986 original MGM library ended up at Time Warner via the Ted Turner - Kirk Kerkorian " Turner Entertainment Co. " transactions. The post-April 1986 MGM library consists of acquisitions of various third-party libraries, such as the Orion Pictures catalogue, leading to MG's 2014 remake of RoboCop . 2000–2009 [ edit ] In July 2000, a marketing executive working for Sony Corporation created a fictitious film critic, David Manning , who gave consistently good reviews for releases from Sony subsidiary Columbia Pictures that generally received poor reviews amongst real critics.  Sony later pulled the ads, suspended Mannin's creator and his supervisor and paid fines to the state of Connecticut  and to fans who saw the reviewed films in the US.  It expanded its operations on April 8, 2005, when a Sony-led consortium acquired the legendary Hollywood studio Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM), in a US$4.8 billion leveraged buyout , through the holding company MGM Holdings Inc.    On June 4, 2008, SP's wholly owned group 2JS Productions B.V. acquired Dutch production company 2waytraffic N.V., famous for Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? , acquired from the original production company Celador, and You Are What You Eat for £114.3 million ($223.2 million in US dollars). 2010–2019 [ edit ] In 2011, the Sony Pictures computer network was breached and approximately one million user accounts associated with the SonyPictures.com website were leaked.  On November 18, 2012, Sony Pictures announced it has passed $4 billion with the success of releases: Skyfall , The Amazing Spider-Man , 21 Jump Street , Men in Black 3 , Hotel Transylvania , Underworld: Awakening , The Vow , and Resident Evil: Retribution .  On November 21, 2013, SPE and Sony Entertainmen's CEO Michael Lynton announced that SPE will shift emphasis from movies to television by cutting its 2014 film slate.     It was also announced on the same day, that there would be more Spider-Man sequels and spin-offs,  though on February 10, 2015, Sony Pictures eventually signed a deal with Disney's Marvel Studios to allow Spider-Man to appear in the Marvel Cinematic Universe , beginning with Captain America: Civil War , before appearing in Spider-Man: Homecoming which was released on July 7, 2017.  The deal also allowed Sony to distribute and have creative control on any MCU film where Spider-Man is the main character (such as Homecoming and its sequel Spider-Man: Far From Home ), while Disney would distribute MCU films where Spider-Man appears without being the main character. On January 22, 2014, SPE folded its technology unit into the various cores of its businesses.  In April, Sony Pictures arranged a film financing deal worth $200 million with LStar Capital , the credit venture of Lone Star Capital and Citibank , half in debt and the other in equity to fund most of SP's film slate for several years. SPE was originally considering a $300 million deal with Blue Anchor Entertainment, led by Bloom Hergott partner John LaViolette and former investment banker & producer Joseph M. Singer, and backed by Longhorn Capital Management and Deutsche Bank, which was held up by regulatory matters.  In November 2019, Sony purchased the remaining 42% stake in GSN from AT&T , placing it under the direction of its television division.  2020–present [ edit ] In April 2021, Sony signed a first-look deal with Netflix , allowing the streaming service to host their films following their theatrical runs and home media releases.  That same month, the company also entered into a multi-year licensing agreement with The Walt Disney Company for its films to stream across Disne's streaming and linear platforms, including Disney+ and Hulu .  In February 2022, Sony signed a deal with WarnerMedia Europe to stream its theatrical films on HBO Max for Central and Eastern Europe countries.  On November 28, 2022, it was announced that Legendary Entertainment reached a distribution deal with Sony to distribute its future slate of films. However, this deal does not include the Dune and MonsterVerse films as they will remain at Warner Bros. The deal came after the negative impact of the merger of Warner Bros' parent company WarnerMedia with Discovery, Inc. to form Warner Bros. Discovery .  On November 14, 2023, Sony Pictures unveiled a special centennial anniversary logo for its Columbia Pictures unit ahead of its 100th anniversary of its founding on January 10, 2024.  On April 18, 2024, it was reported that Sony was interested in acquiring Paramount Global through a joint buyout with Apollo Global Management .   Sony and Apollo submitted a $26 billion all-cash offer to acquire Paramount Global on May 2, 2024.  A special committee of Paramount’s board of directors met on May 5, 2024, and signed off on beginning deal talks with Sony and Apollo.  On June 12, 2024, Sony Pictures acquired Alamo Drafthouse Cinema for a sum which are yet-to-be disclosed. This marked the first time in more than 75 years that a major Hollywood studio would own a theater chain, as the 1948 federal ruling from United States v. Paramount Pictures, Inc. prevented them from owning exhibition companies until 2020.   Alamo Drafthouse will continue to operate their film festival Fantastic Fest , which is included in the acquisition.  2014 hack [ edit ] Main article: 2014 Sony Pictures hack In November 2014, the Sony Pictures computer network was compromised by a group of hackers named Guardians of Peace , disabling many computers.  Later the same week, five of Sony Picture' movies were leaked, including some not yet released (such as Fury and Annie ), as well as confidential data about 47,000 current and former Sony employees.    Film historian Wheeler Winston Dixon suggested that the hack, which exposed the inner workings of the studio, was "not a pretty picture," and served as a "wake-up call to the entire industry."  The hack also revealed some other documents, emails between Hollywood moguls referring to Barack Obama's cinematic tastes, a possible partnership with Marvel Studios for the inclusion of the superhero Spider-Man in Captain America: Civil War , which was later confirmed in February 2015, amongst others.   On December 16, the hackers issued a warning to moviegoers, threatening to attack anyone who sees The Interview during the holidays and urging people to "remember the 11th of September 2001 ".  On December 17, 2014, Sony cancelled the previously planned December 25 release of The Interview in response to hacker threats.  On February 24, 2015, Tom Rothman was named chairman of SP's motion picture group to replace Amy Pascal .   On April 16, 2015, WikiLeaks published over 30,287 documents, 173 e-mails, and 2,200 corporate e-mail addresses of Sony Picture' employees. WikiLeaks said in a press release that the content of the leaks were "newsworthy and at the center of a geo-political conflict" and belonged "in the public domain". Sony Pictures later condemned the hack and subsequent leaks, calling it a "malicious criminal act", while also criticizing WikiLeaks for describing the leaked content as public domain .    Seth Rogen has expressed doubts about North Korea being responsible for the 2014 Sony hack. Based on the timeline of events and the amount of information hacked, he believes the hack may have been conducted by a Sony employee.  Sale of headquarters [ edit ] Sony Pictures Plaza in 2008 In 2014, the eight-story, 260,000sq ft building originally designed by architect Maxwell Starkman and known as Sony Pictures Plaza, which was originally the headquarters of MGM Studios and later Sony Pictures Studios, was sold to Runyon Group and fellow developer LBA Realty for $159 million.  Corporate structure [ edit ] Headquartered in Culver City, California , U.S., SPE comprises various studios and entertainment brands, including Affirm Films , Columbia Pictures , Screen Gems , Sony Pictures Classics , TriStar Pictures , Crunchyroll , Game Show Network and Alamo Drafthouse Cinema Senior management team [ edit ] Tony Vinciquerra Chairman and CEO, Sony Pictures Entertainment Stacy Green Executive Vice President & Chief People Officer, Sony Pictures Entertainment Philip Rowley Senior Executive Vice President & Chief Financial Officer, Sony Pictures Entertainment Tom Rothman Chairman, Sony Pictures Motion Picture Group  Katherine Pope President, Sony Pictures Television Studios Michael Kustermann CEO, Sony Pictures Experiences and Alamo Drafthouse Cinema Motion Picture Group [ edit ] Sony Pictures Motion Picture Group (SPMPG):  Formerly Columbia TriStar Motion Picture Group. With a library of more than 4,000 films (including 12 Academy Award for Best Picture winners), as of 2004 this unit of Sony distributes about 22 films a year under its various studio brands in 67 countries.  The group owns studio facilities in the United States, Hong Kong, Madrid , Mexico, the United Kingdom, Brazil and Japan. Columbia Pictures : Founded in 1924 by Harry Cohn , Sony acquired the studio in 1989 from The Coca-Cola Company for $3.4 billion.   Ghost Corps : Oversees projects relating to the Ghostbusters franchise, including films, television shows, and merchandising. TriStar Pictures : Formed in 1982 as a joint venture between Columbia Pictures, HBO , and CBS . Became part of Columbia Pictures Entertainment in December 1987 and the Sony ownership in 1989. Was relaunched in 2004 as a marketing and acquisitions unit that specializes in the genre and independent films. TriStar Productions : A film and television production company which is a joint-venture between Tom Rothman and SPE. Screen Gems : Originally Columbi's animation division and later a television production company best known for T's Bewitched and The Partridge Family , as well as bringing The Three Stooges short subjects to TV in 1958. Sony revived the Screen Gems brand in 1998 to develop mid-priced movies (production budget of between $20 million and $50 million) in specific genres such as science fiction, horror , black cinema and franchise films. Scream Gems: A short film specialty label of Screen Gems. Sony Pictures Imageworks : Founded in 1992, it is Son's in-house visual effects and computer animation studio.  Sony Pictures Animation : Founded in 2002, it is Son's animation studio that produces animated feature films as well as animated television series. Sony Pictures Classics : Founded in 1992, it is Son's specialty film label that distributes, produces and acquires films such as documentaries , independent and arthouse films in the United States and internationally. 3000 Pictures: A production company that was launched in July 2019 by Elizabeth Gabler, former Fox 2000 Pictures president, who henced the name. This is a joint venture between Sony Pictures Entertainment and HarperCollins , producing HarperCollins adaptations. Sony Pictures Releasing : Founded in 1994  as a successor to Triumph Releasing Corporation. The unit handles distribution, marketing, and promotion for films produced by Sony Pictures Entertainment; including Columbia Pictures, TriStar Pictures, Screen Gems, Sony Pictures Classics, among others. 1 Sony Pictures Releasing International: Formerly known as Columbia TriStar Film Distributors International. It is the international arm of Sony Pictures Releasing. Sony Pictures India: A production house established by Sony to release Indian movies and distribute Hollywood movies released under Columbia Pictures. Sony Pictures International Productions: A division that produces films in local languages other than English around the world. Sony Pictures Worldwide Acquisitions (SPWA): Formerly Worldwide SPE Acquisitions, Inc. A Sony division which acquires and produces about 60 films per year for a wide variety of distribution platforms, especially for non-theatrical markets. Destination Films : A motion picture company which currently specializes in action, thriller, sci-fi, niche and low-end to medium-end horror films was purchased by Sony in 2001. Stage 6 Films : A direct-to-video label created in 2007. Also releases some films theatrically. Affirm Films : A motion picture label launched in 2007 to release gospel and Christian films. Great American Pure Flix : Launched as Pure Flix in 2015. A streaming service which is a joint venture between Affirm Films and Great American Media . Home Entertainment [ edit ] Sony Pictures Home Entertainment : Founded in 1978 as Columbia Pictures Home Entertainment. Currently manufactures and distributes the Sony film and television libraries on Blu-ray , Ultra HD Blu-ray , 3D Blu-ray , DVD , and digital download . Sony Pictures Kids Zone : Formerly known as Sony Kid' Music/Video, Sony Wonder and Sony Pictures Family Fun. The former music and video label of Sony Music Entertainment and later Sony BMG , it became the kids and family entertainment label of SPHE in 2007. Kartoon Studios (minority stake) A Squared Entertainment LLC Genius Brands Music Kartoon Channel Stan Lee Comics LLC: A comic book publishing and licensing company which is a joint venture between Kartoon Studios and POW! Entertainment . Stan Lee Universe: A joint venture between Kartoon Studios and POW! Entertainment managing the likeness and IPs of comic book writer and publisher Stan Lee . Wow Unlimited Media Ezrin Hirsh Entertainment: A joint venture between Bob Ezrin and Michael Hirsh . Mainframe Studios : Formerly known as Mainframe Entertainment, Rainmaker Entertainment and Rainmaker Studios, it is a Canadian animation studio founded in 1993 best known for producing ReBoot , Beast Wars: Transformers and the Barbie direct-to-video film series . Frederator Networks Channel Frederator Network Cartoon Hangover Átomo Network: A multi-channel network which is a joint venture between Frederator Networks and Ánima . Cinematica Frederator Digital Frederator Studios : Founded in 1997, it is best known for producing The Fairly OddParents , Adventure Time , Bravest Warriors , Bee and PuppyCat and Castlevania . The Leaderboard Network Television Group [ edit ] U.S. production and distribution [ edit ] Sony Pictures Television : (formerly Columbia TriStar Television Group) The successor-in-interest to Columbi's television division (first Screen Gems, later Columbia Pictures Television , TriStar Television , and Columbia TriStar Television ), as of 2004 the unit was producing 60 titles for various television outlets globally. Contains a library that includes more than 35,000 episodes of more than 270 television series and 22,000 game show episodes under the Sony Pictures Television brand, and the television rights to the Embassy Pictures library (including The Graduate and The Lion in Winter ) and also the owner of the television division " Embassy Television "—among most recent notable shows in this library are Party of Five , The Shield , Seinfeld , The King of Queens , Days of Our Lives and The Young and the Restless . Their former international distribution division, Sony Pictures Television International, was responsible for global distribution for the SPE film and television properties worldwide. Formerly known as Columbia TriStar International Television from 1992 to 2002. Affirm Television: Affirm Film's television division.  Embassy Row : A television and digital production company founded in 2005 by Michael Davies . SPT acquired the company on January 14, 2009. Sony Pictures Television Game Show (SPTGS): The game show production division of SPT formed in 2022. Califon Productions: The production company responsible for Wheel of Fortune . Jeopardy Productions: The production company responsible for Jeopardy! . Sony Pictures Television Music Development (SPTMD): The music development division of SPT formed in 2023. Sony Pictures Television Nonfiction (SPTN): Founded as CKX, Inc. in 2005. With a library of more than 100 series broadcast in over 35 countries as of 2023, this unit produces nonfiction and documentary programming. SPT acquired the company in 2022.  Formerly CORE Media Group, Inc. and Industrial Media, LLC. 19 Entertainment : A television production company founded by Simon Fuller in 1985 known for producing the So You Think You Can Dance and Idol franchises. 19 Recordings : The music division of 19 Entertainment. B17 Entertainment: A television production company founded by Rhett Bachner and Brien Meagher in 2013. House of NonFiction: A television production company founded by Alex Stapleton in 2021. Maxine: A television production company founded by Mary Robertson in 2022. Sharp Entertainment : A television production company founded by Matt Sharp in 2003. The Intellectual Property Corporation : A television production company founded by Eli Holzman and Aaron Saidman in 2016. This Machine Filmworks: A film and television production company founded by R. J. Cutler in 2020. Trilogy Films: A film and television production company founded by Dawn Porter . UNConventional Entertainment: A television production company founded by Gena McCarthy in 2023. Sony Pictures Television Studios: A production name launched on July 25, 2017, to carry out the SPT library, starting on January 7, 2020.  International production [ edit ] Bad Wolf : Founded by Julie Gardner and Jane Tranter in 2015. SPT acquired the company in 2021.   Blueprint Television : SPT acquired a minority stake in 2016. Curio Pictures : Formerly Playmaker Media. An Australian production company founded in 2009 by David Taylor and David Maher. SPT acquired the company in 2014.  Eleven : Founded by Jamie Campbell and Joel Wilson in 2006. SPT acquired the company in 2020. Eleventh Hour Films: SPT acquired the company in 2018. Fable Pictures Floresta Huaso: A Chinese joint venture production company launched in 2004 by Sony Pictures Television International and Hua Long Film Digital Production Co., Ltd. of the China Film Group in Beijing .  Human Media Left Bank Pictures : A British production company founded by Andy Harries , Francis Hopkinson, and Marigo Kehoe in 2007. Majority stake acquired by SPT in 2012 and then full control in 2022. Palladium Fiction Satisfy: A joint venture with Satisfaction Group for France, with SPT holding a 20% stake in the company. Sony Pictures Television Kids (SPTK): Founded as Silvergate Media in 2011. The company is best known for the animated series Hilda and Octonauts . SPT acquired the company in 2019. Stolen Picture : Founded by Simon Pegg and Nick Frost in 2016. SPT acquired a minority stake in the company in 2017. Stellify Media : A joint venture between SPT, Kieran Doherty, and Matt Worthy launched in 2014 for Northern Ireland.  Teleset : Founded in 1995. SPT acquired the company in 2009. Toro Media The Whisper Group: SPT acquired a minority stake in the company in 2020.  Sony Pictures Television Networks [ edit ] United States [ edit ] Game Show Network, LLC Game Show Network (GSN): A basic cable channel launched in 1994 broadcasting game shows. Game Show Central : A free ad-supported streaming television network broadcasting archived original programming from the GSN network. Crunchyroll Channel : A free ad-supported streaming television network launched in 2023 broadcasting anime managed as a joint venture with Sony Pictures and Sony Music Entertainment Japan -owned Aniplex's Crunchyroll, LLC . CPE US Networks, Inc. Get : A digital multicast network broadcasting classic programming from the 1960s through the 2000s. Sony Cine: A Spanish-language cable channel. Sony Movie Channel : A cable channel launched in 2010 broadcasting films from the SPE library as well as from other distributors. International [ edit ] AXN : A general entertainment television network launched in 1997 which airs across Asia, Latin America and Europe. Sony Channel : A brand of general entertainment channels. Sony Entertainment Television : An Indian Hindi-language general entertainment pay television channel launched in 1995. Other Sony Pictures operations [ edit ] Columbia TriStar Marketing Group (CTMG) Crunchyroll, LLC : A distributor of anime series and films managed as a joint venture with Sony Music Entertainment Japan's Aniplex . Crunchyroll : The eponymous streaming service launched in 2006. Crunchyroll UK and Ireland : Founded as Golden Square Music in 1987. The British division of Crunchyroll, LLC. Formerly Island World Communications, Manga Entertainment and Funimation UK and Ireland. Crunchyroll Store Australia : Founded as Madman Anime in 2016. The Australian division of Crunchyroll, LLC. Crunchyroll EMEA : Founded as Viz Media Europe in 2007. The division of Crunchyroll, LLC that serves Africa, the Middle East and non-English speaking Europe. Crunchyroll SAS: The French division of Crunchyroll EMEA. Crunchyroll SA: The Swiss division of Crunchyroll EMEA. Crunchyroll GmbH: The German division of Crunchyroll EMEA. Crunchyroll Games: The gaming division of Crunchyroll, LLC. Crunchyroll Store : An anime distributor and online shop. Crunchyroll Channel : A free ad-supported streaming television network launched in 2023 broadcasting anime managed as a joint venture with Sony Pictures Television Networks' Game Show Network, LLC . Madison Gate Records : A music record label of SPE specializing in soundtracks and other recordings derived from feature films, television series and other media. Pixomondo (PXO): An international visual effects and virtual production studio founded in 2001 by Thilo Kuther. SPE acquired the company in 2022. Sony Pictures Consumer Products: The consumer products division of SPE. Sony Pictures Cable Ventures, Inc. Sony Pictures Europe: Offices located at 25 Golden Square, London , England Sony Pictures Family Entertainment Group (SPFEG): The family entertainment unit of SPE founded in 1999. Sony Pictures Interactive Sony Pictures Studios : The actual physical buildings, land and movie-making equipment properties in Culver City, California. Includes 22 sound stages, ranging in size from 7,600 to 43,000 square feet (700 to 4,000 m 2 ) Sony Pictures Studios Post Production Facilities Toei Animation (1.89%, co-owned with Toei Company , TV Asahi , Bandai Namco Filmworks and Fuji Media Holdings ): Founded in 1948 by Kenzō Masaoka and Zenjirō Yamamoto, it is best known for the Dragon Ball series, Sailor Moon , One Piece and Saint Seiya . Toei Audio Visual Art Center (TAVAC): The recording facility of the studio. Toei Animation Asia Pacific, Inc.: The Philippines division of the company. Toei Animation Inc. : The American division of the company. Toei Animation Enterprises Limited: The Hong Kong division of the company. Toei Animation Europe S.A.S.: The European division of the company. Toei Animation Music Publishing: The music publishing division of the company. Toei Animation Shanghai Co.: The Chinese division of the company. Worldwide Product Fulfillment Sony Pictures Experiences Alamo Drafthouse Cinema Related Sony Pictures divisions [ edit ] The following are other Sony Pictures divisions that are not subsidiaries of the California-based Sony Pictures Entertainment, but are instead subsidiaries of the main Tokyo-based Sony Group Corporation. Sony Pictures Entertainment Japan (SPEJ): The company plans, produces, manufactures, sells, imports, exports, leases, broadcasts and distributes movies, TV programs, videos and audio-visual software in Japan. The company website says it was established on February 10, 1984,  predating Son's acquisition of Columbia Pictures Entertainment by 5 years. SPEJ was formed in 1991 through the merger of Columbia TriStar Japan, RCA-Columbia Pictures Video Japan, and Japan International Enterprises.  Based in Tokyo, Japan. The California-based Sony Pictures Entertainment holds a majority share of SPEJ.   Madhouse (5%, joint venture with Nippon TV ) Music On! TV (co-owned with Sony Music Entertainment Japan ) Sony Pictures Digital Productions Inc. (SPDP): A subsidiary of Sony Corporation based in Japan.  Sony Station Sony Pictures Network Sony Pictures Digital Networks SPiN SoapCity Screenblast Advanced Platform Group APG Sony Pictures Networks India (SPNI): Trading as Culver Max Entertainment (CME), it is a subsidiary of Sony Group Corporation based in India.  Sony Entertainment Television and Sony SAB are its main brands. It also owns many other companies and brands under the Sony brand. Sony Aath Sony BBC Earth (joint venture with BBC Studios ) Sony Entertainment Television Sony Kal Sony Marathi Sony Max Sony Max 2 Sony Pal Sony Pictures Networks Productions Sony Pix Sony SAB Sony Six Sony Sports Network Sony Sports Ten 1 Sony Sports Ten 2 Sony Sports Ten 3 Sony Sports Ten 4 Sony Sports Ten 5 Sony Wah Sony YAY! Studio NEXT

2024 film by John Krasinski IF is a 2024 American fantasy comedy film written, produced, and directed by John Krasinski . The film features an ensemble cast that includes Cailey Fleming , Ryan Reynolds , Krasinski, Fiona Shaw , Alan Kim , and Liza Colón-Zayas , along with the voices of Phoebe Waller-Bridge , Louis Gossett Jr. , and Steve Carell . Combining live-action and animation , the film follows a young girl (Fleming) who goes through a difficult experience and begins to see everyon's imaginary friends who have been left behind as their real-life children have grown up. Development of the film began in 2019, with Krasinski set to write and direct and Reynolds attached to star. The rest of the cast joined between October 2021 and January 2022, and filming took place in New York City between August of that year and May 2023. IF was theatrically released by Paramount Pictures in the United States on May 17, 2024. The film received mixed reviews from critics and has grossed $185 million worldwide. It was also well-received for its story-telling, Krasinsk's direction, as well as the cast performances (including those of Flemin's, Reynold' and Carrel's). Plot [ edit ] Twelve-year-old Bea moves into her grandmother Margare's apartment in New York while her father waits for heart surgery in the same hospital where her mother died of cancer years earlier. One night, Bea sees an unfamiliar creature, following it back to her grandmothe's building. The next day, she sees the creature again, accompanied by a man. Bea follows them to a nearby house where the man, Cal, retrieves a large furry purple creature named Blue. She also meets the other creature, a butterfly-like being named Blossom, and faints. She awakens in Ca's apartment where she learns that he has been working with imaginary friends , nicknamed IFs, to place them with new children as their original children have grown up and forgotten them. Initially reluctant, Bea eventually decides to help Cal. The next day, Cal takes Bea to Memory Lane Retirement Home, a retirement community for IFs housed underneath a swing ride in Coney Island . Lewis, an elderly teddy bear and the head of the facility, inspires Bea to use her imagination to redesign the facility, much to the chagrin of Cal. Bea tries to match one of the IFs with Benjamin, a young patient at the hospital, but he is unable to see any of them. Lewis suggests to Bea that maybe IFs do not need new kids, but rather to reunite with their old ones. Talking with her grandmother, she sees a picture of her as a young dancer and recognizes Blossom in the background of the picture. Realizing Blossom was her grandmothe's IF, Bea decides to test Lewi' idea. Playing one of her grandmothe's records inspires Margaret to dance and she remembers Blossom, instilling Bea with hope. Following a tip, Bea, Cal, and Blue find Blu's original kid, Jeremy, now a grown man trying to launch a business. With help from Bea, Jeremy remembers Blue who gives Jeremy the confidence he needs for a business presentation. That evening, Bea arrives at Margare's who frantically informs her granddaughter that there has been a complication with her fathe's treatment. Comforted by Cal, Bea says she does not want to say goodbye to her dad, so Cal advises her to tell him a story instead. At the hospital, Bea tells her father a story about how she was pushing herself to act like a grown-up when she is just a child who still needs her father. He wakes up and they hug each other. When Bea goes outside his hospital room, she sees that all of the IFs, who accompanied her to the hospital, are gone. Returning to her grandmothe's building, Bea goes to thank Cal but discovers that the door to his apartment actually opens into an old storage room. After her dad is released from the hospital, he and Bea pack up to go home. During this, Bea realizes from an old picture she painted that Cal is actually her own IF, Calvin, forgotten after the death of her mother. She rushes to his room and thanks him for helping her and tells him she will always need him. This allows Bea to see Cal and the IFs again, and they reunite. Some time later, Cal begins reuniting the IFs with their original kids, now grown up. Benjamin meets his IF, a cartoonish dragon with glasses and a cast. Bea and her father return home, where the latter trips over his IF, an invisible boy named Keith. Cast [ edit ] Cailey Fleming as Bea, a girl who can see IFs. Audrey Hoffman as Bea at the ages of 3-5. Ryan Reynolds as Cal, Be's neighbor who can see IFs. John Krasinski as Be's dad. Fiona Shaw as Margaret, Be's grandmother who was the creator of Blossom. Alan Kim as Benjamin, a boy recuperating in the hospital. Liza Colón-Zayas as Janet. Bobby Moynihan as Jeremy, a man who was the creator of Blue. David Weissman as a younger Jeremy. Catharine Daddario as Be's mom. Voices [ edit ] Steve Carell as Blue, an IF who resembles a large purple monster. Phoebe Waller-Bridge as Blossom, a rubber hose -style butterfly-like IF. Louis Gossett Jr. as Lewis, an elderly teddy bear IF who runs the Memory Lane Retirement Home. The film is dedicated to his memory, as he died before its release. Awkwafina as Bubble, an IF composed of a bunch of bubbles that can pop and reconstitute themselves. Emily Blunt as Unicorn, a plush unicorn IF. George Clooney as Spaceman, an astronaut IF. Bradley Cooper as Ice, an IF who resembles an anthropomorphic glass of water. Matt Damon as Flower, an IF who resembles an anthropomorphic sunflower. Bill Hader as Banana, an anthropomorphic banana IF who works as a fitness instructor at the Memory Lane Retirement Home. Richard Jenkins as Art Teacher, an animated human IF. Keegan-Michael Key as Slime, an IF who resembles a slime blob. John Krasinski as Marshmallow, an IF who resembles an anthropomorphic marshmallow whose head is always on fire. Blake Lively as Octopuss, a cat IF who wears an octopus costume. Allyson Seeger as Viola, an anthropomorphic violin IF with sunglasses. Sebastian Maniscalco as Magician Mouse, a mouse IF who is dressed like a magician. Christopher Meloni as Cosmo, a detective IF with an obscured face. Matthew Rhys as Ghost, a crown-wearing ghost IF. Sam Rockwell as Guardian Dog, an IF who resembles a dog superhero. Maya Rudolph as Alligator, a plush alligator IF. Amy Schumer as Gummy Bear, a large gummy bear IF. Jon Stewart as Robot, a robotic IF. Brad Pitt is credited as Keith, an invisible IF even though the character has no dialogue. The role is a reference to Pit's cameo as Vanisher in Deadpool 2 (2018), co-starring Reynolds.   Production [ edit ] In October 2019, Paramount Pictures outbid Lionsgate and Sony , among other studios, to win the rights to Imaginary Friends , a project developed by John Krasinski and Ryan Reynolds , with Krasinski set to write and direct it.  In May 2021, Krasinsk's Sunday Night Productions and Reynold's Maximum Effort signed first-look deals with Paramount.   In October 2021, Phoebe Waller-Bridge and Fiona Shaw joined the cast.  In January 2022, Steve Carell , Alan Kim , Cailey Fleming , and Louis Gossett Jr. joined the cast, with the film retitled IF . The film reunites Krasinski and Carell, who both starred in The Office (2005–2013) as Jim Halpert and Michael Scott , respectively.  In August 2022, Bobby Moynihan was added to the cast.  Principal photography began on August 31, 2022, with Janusz Kamiński as cinematographer, and wrapped by early May 2023.   Framestore provided the visual effects and animation.   Animation director Arslan Elver and VFX supervisor Chris Lawrence worked alongside Krasinski on set and during pre- and post-production.   The film is dedicated to Gossett Jr., who died before its release.  Music [ edit ] Michael Giacchino composed the score for the film.   The film’s soundtrack includes Tina Turner ’s " Better Be Good to Me " and the “Adagio for Spartacus and Phyrigia” from Aram Khachaturian ’s Spartacus . Release [ edit ] Theatrical [ edit ] IF was released by Paramount Pictures in the United States on May 17, 2024,  after its originally scheduled release date of November 17, 2023 was first pushed to May 24, 2024, and then shifted forward by one week.  Home media [ edit ] The film was released on digital platforms by Paramount Home Entertainment on June 18, 2024.  It began streaming on Paramount+ beginning July 9, 2024,  and is set to be released on Ultra HD Blu-ray, Blu-ray, and DVD on August 13, 2024.  Reception [ edit ] Box office [ edit ] As of July 7, 2024  , IF has grossed $110.8 million in the United States and Canada and $74.7 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $185.5 million.   Variety estimated the film would need to gross $275 million worldwide in order to break-even.  In the United States and Canada, IF was  released alongside The Strangers: Chapter 1 and Back to Black , and was originally projected to gross around $40 million from 4,041 theaters in its opening weekend.  After making $10.3 million on its first day (including $1.8 million from Thursday night previews), weekend estimates were lowered to $30 million. It went on to debut to $33.7 million, topping the box office.  In its second weekend, the film made $16.8 million (a drop of -53%), finishing third behind newcomers Furiosa: A Mad Max Saga and The Garfield Movie .  In France, the film made $3.3 million during its opening weekend in 621 cinemas.  Critical response [ edit ] On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , 49% of 194 critic' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 5.8/10. The websit's consensus reads: "A sweet ode to rediscovering on's inner child, IF largely works as old-fashioned family entertainment despite an occasionally unfocused and unnecessarily complicated plot."  Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned the film a score of 46 out of 100, based on 38 critics, indicating "mixed or average" reviews.  Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale, while those polled by PostTrak gave it an 84% overall positive score, with 64% saying they would definitely recommend it.  Adrian Horton of The Guardian awarded the film 3 out of 5 stars, writing that it "checks the boxes" on the elements of a family-friendly movie, but also noting that it does not "fully conjure the magic" of other films in the genre.  Another mixed review was published on NPR by Bob Mondello , who wrote that "mostly the filmmakers detour, decorate and digitize their story rather than telling it, and that does't mesh well with the real-world stuff — da's surgery, for instance, and Be's wandering all over Brooklyn without her grandma seeming to notice. And yes, I know: IF is a kid-flick, but it still needs grounding. W're in Brooklyn, not Willy Wonkaland."  RogerEbert.com reviewer Clint Worthington called the film "a well-intentioned misfire".  Tomris Laffly of Variety wrote that the movie was "in desperate need of some coherent world-building", while praising the performance of Cailey Fleming in the lead role.  In a more negative review for The Hollywood Reporter , Frank Scheck criticised the film as "plagued by significant tonal shifts and pacing issues".  Noah Berlatsky of Chicago Reader was even more dismissive, stating, " IF makes you wish you were watching some other movie. (...) Ther's a fine line between the whimsical dream logic of Roald Dahl and irritating, incoherent nonsense. Director John Krasinsk's new kids film IF is nowhere near that line. Despite the best efforts of the extremely talented child actor Cailey Fleming, IF makes no sense, narratively, emotionally, or visually."  Several critics noted the fil's sharing some similarities with the Cartoon Network animated series Foste's Home for Imaginary Friends , which itself featured an orphanage that takes care of imaginary friends after their kids outgrow them and they leave after other children adopt them.

American film studio, subsidiary of Paramount Global Paramount Pictures Corporation , doing business as Paramount Pictures (also known simply as Paramount ) is an American film and television production and distribution company and the namesake subsidiary of Paramount Global . It is the sixth-oldest film studio in the world, the second-oldest film studio in the United States (behind Universal Pictures ), and the sole member of the "Big Five" film studios located within the city limits of Los Angeles .  In 1916, film producer Adolph Zukor put 24 actors and actresses under contract and honored each with a star on the logo.  In 1967, the number of stars was reduced to 22 and their hidden meaning was dropped. In 2014, Paramount Pictures became the first major Hollywood studio to distribute all of its films in digital form only.  The compan's headquarters and studios are located at 5555 Melrose Avenue, Hollywood, California.  Paramount Pictures is a member of the Motion Picture Association (MPA).  History Famous Players Film Company Main article: Famous Players Film Company Paramount is the sixth oldest surviving film studio in the world; after Gaumont Film Company (1895), Pathé (1896), Titanus (1904), Nordisk Film (1906), and Universal Studios (1912). It is the last major film studio still headquartered in the Hollywood district of Los Angeles .  Paramount Picture' first logo, with 24 stars, based on a design by its co-founder William Wadsworth Hodkinson , used from 1914 to 1967 Paramount Pictures dates its existence from the 1912 founding date of the Famous Players Film Company . Hungarian-born founder Adolph Zukor , who had been an early investor in nickelodeons , saw that movies appealed mainly to working-class immigrants.  With partners Daniel Frohman and Charles Frohman he planned to offer feature-length films that would appeal to the middle class by featuring the leading theatrical players of the time (leading to the slogan "Famous Players in Famous Plays"). By mid-1913, Famous Players had completed five films, and Zukor was on his way to success. Its first film was Les Amours de la reine Élisabeth , which starred Sarah Bernhardt . That same year, another aspiring producer, Jesse L. Lasky , opened his Lasky Feature Play Company with money borrowed from his brother-in-law, Samuel Goldfish, later known as Samuel Goldwyn . The Lasky company hired as their first employee a stage director with virtually no film experience, Cecil B. DeMille , who would find a suitable site in Hollywood. This place was a rented old horse barn converted into a production facility with an enlarged open-air stage located between Vine Street , Selma Avenue, Argyle Avenue and Sunset Boulevard . It was later known as the Lasky-DeMille Barn .  In 1914, their first feature film, The Squaw Man was released. On May 8, 1914, Paramount Pictures Corporation (previously known as Progressive Pictures) was founded by a Utah theatre owner, W. W. Hodkinson , who had bought and merged five smaller firms.  On May 15, 1914, Hodkinson signed a five-year contract with the Famous Players Film Company, the Lasky Company and Bosworth, Inc. to distribute their films.  Actor, director and producer Hobart Bosworth had started production of a series of Jack London movies. Paramount was the first successful nationwide distributor; until this time, films were sold on a statewide or regional basis which had proved costly to film producers. Also, Famous Players and Lasky were privately owned while Paramount was a corporation. Famous Players–Lasky Main article: Famous Players–Lasky In 1916, Zukor engineered a three-way merger of his Famous Players, the Lasky Company, and Paramount. Zukor and Lasky bought Hodkinson out of Paramount, and merged the three companies into one. The new company Lasky and Zukor founded on June 28, Famous Players–Lasky Corporation , although it continued to use the name "Paramount," as well. As a result, it became the largest film company at the time with a value of US$ 12.5 million (equivalent to $241.8 million in 2023).  The corporation was able to grow quickly, with Lasky and his partners Goldwyn and DeMille running the production side, Hiram Abrams in charge of distribution, and Zukor making great plans. With only the exhibitor-owned First National as a rival, Famous Players–Lasky and its "Paramount Pictures" soon dominated the business.  The fusion was finalized on November 7, 1916.  Lask's original studio (a.k.a. "The Barn") as it appeared in the mid-1920s. The Taft building, built in 1923, is visible in the background. Because Zukor believed in stars, he signed and developed many of the leading early stars, including Mary Pickford , Marguerite Clark , Pauline Frederick , Douglas Fairbanks , Gloria Swanson , Rudolph Valentino , and Wallace Reid . With so many important players, Paramount was able to introduce " block booking ", which meant that an exhibitor who wanted a particular sta's films had to buy a yea's worth of other Paramount productions. It was this system that gave Paramount a leading position in the 1920s and 1930s, but which led the government to pursue it on antitrust grounds for more than twenty years.  By the mid-1920s, the old Lasky-DeMille barn property was not big enough to handle all of the studio' West Coast productions.  On January 5, 1926, Lasky reached an agreement to buy the Robert Brunton Studios, a 26-acre facility owned by United Pictures and located at 5451 Marathon Street, for $1.0 million (equivalent to $13.8 million in 2023).  On March 29, the company began an eight-month building program to renovate the existing facilities and erect new ones.  On May 8, Lasky finally moved operations from the Sunset and Vine lot to the new building. At present, those facilities are still part of the Paramount Pictures headquarters. Zukor hired independent producer B. P. Schulberg , an unerring eye for new talent, to run the new West Coast operations. The logo, with Portuguese captions: Distribuida Pela Paramount . On April 1, 1927, the company name was changed to Paramount Famous Lasky Corporation .  In September 1927, the Paramount Famous Lasky Corporation studio in Astoria (New York City) was temporarily closed with the objective of equipping it with the technology for the production of sound films .   In the same year, Paramount began releasing Inkwell Imps , animated cartoons produced by Max and Dave Fleischer's Fleischer Studios in New York City. The Fleischers, veterans in the animation industry, were among the few animation producers capable of challenging the prominence of Walt Disney . The Paramount newsreel series Paramount News ran from 1927 to 1957. Paramount was also one of the first Hollywood studios to release what were known at that time as "talkies", and in 1929, released their first musical, Innocents of Paris . Richard A. Whiting and Leo Robin composed the score for the film; Maurice Chevalier starred and sang the most famous song from the film, " Louise ". Publix, Balaban and Katz, Loe's competition and wonder theaters The driving force behind Paramoun's rise was Zukor. He built a chain of nearly 2,000 screens, ran two production studios (in Astoria, New York , now the Kaufman Astoria Studios , and Hollywood, California ), and became an early investor in radio, acquiring for the corporation a 50% interest in the new Columbia Broadcasting System in 1928 (selling it within a few years; this would not be the last time Paramount and CBS crossed paths). By acquiring the successful Balaban & Katz chain in 1926, Zukor gained the services of Barney Balaban (who would eventually become Paramoun's president in 1936), his brother A. J. Balaban (who would eventually supervise all stage production nationwide and produce talkie shorts), and their partner Sam Katz (who would run the Paramount-Publix theatre chain in New York City from the thirty-five-story Paramount Theatre Building on Times Square ). Detail of Publix Theatre logo on what is now Indiana Repertory Theatre Balaban and Katz had developed the Wonder Theater concept, first publicized around 1918 in Chicago. The Chicago Theater was created as a very ornate theater and advertised as a "wonder theater". When Publix acquired Balaban, they embarked on a project to expand the wonder theaters, and starting building in New York City in 1927. While Balaban and Public were dominant in Chicago, Loe's was the big player in New York City, and did not want the Publix theaters to overshadow theirs. The two companies brokered a non-competition deal for New York City and Chicago, and Loe's took over the New York City area projects, developing five wonder theaters . Publix continued Balaba's wonder theater development in its home area.  On April 24, 1930, Paramount-Famous Lasky Corporation became the Paramount Publix Corporation .   1920s and 1931–40: Receivership and reorganization Paramount Showma's Pictures advertisement, 1925 Eventually, Zukor shed most of his early partners; the Frohman brothers, Hodkinson and Goldwyn were out by 1917 while Lasky hung on until 1932, when, blamed for the near-collapse of Paramount in the Great Depression years, he was also tossed out. In 1931, to solve the financial problems of the company Zukor hired taxi/rental car magnate John D. Hertz as chairman of the finance committee in order to assist vice-president and treasurer Ralph A. Kohn.  However, on January 6, 1933, Hertz resigned from his position when it become evident that his measures to lift the company had failed.  The over-expansion and use of overvalued Paramount stock for purchases created a $21 million debt which led the company into receivership on January 26, 1933,  and later filing bankruptcy on March 14, 1933.  On April 17, 1933, bankruptcy trustees were appointed and Zukor lost control of the company.   The company remained under the control of trustees for more than a year in order to restructure the debt and pursue a reorganization plan.  On December 3, 1934, the reorganization plan was formally proposed.  After prolonged hearings in court, final confirmation was obtained on April 25, 1935, when Federal Judge Alfred C. Coxe Jr. approved the reorganization of the Paramount-Publix Corporation under Section 77-B of the Bankruptcy Act .   On June 4, 1935, John E. Otterson  became president of the re-emerged and newly renamed Paramount Pictures Inc.  Zukor returned to the company and was named production chief but after Barney Balaban was appointed president on July 2, 1936, he was soon replaced by Y. Frank Freeman and symbolically named chairman of the board.   On August 28, 1935, Paramount Pictures was re-listed on the New York Stock Exchange and when the company was under Balaba's leadership, the studio was successfully relaunched.  Paramount Pictures ad in The Film Daily , 1932 As always, Paramount films continued to emphasize stars; in the 1920s there were Gloria Swanson , Wallace Reid , Rudolph Valentino , Florence Vidor , Thomas Meighan , Pola Negri , Bebe Daniels , Antonio Moreno , Richard Dix , Esther Ralston , Emil Jannings , George Bancroft , Betty Compson , Clara Bow , Adolphe Menjou , and Charles Buddy Rogers . By the late 1920s and the early 1930s, talkies brought in a range of powerful draws: Richard Arlen , Nancy Carroll , Maurice Chevalier , Gary Cooper , Marlene Dietrich , Charles Ruggles , Ruth Chatterton , William Powell , Mae West , Sylvia Sidney , Bing Crosby , Claudette Colbert , the Marx Brothers , W.C. Fields , Fredric March , Jack Oakie , Jeanette MacDonald (whose first two films were shot at Paramoun's Astoria, New York , studio), Carole Lombard , George Raft , Miriam Hopkins , Cary Grant and Stuart Erwin , among them.  In this period Paramount can truly be described as a movie factory, turning out sixty to seventy pictures a year. Such were the benefits of having a huge theater chain to fill, and of block booking to persuade other chains to go along. In 1933, Mae West would also add greatly to Paramoun's success with her suggestive movies She Done Him Wrong and 'm No Angel .   However, the sex appeal West gave in these movies would also lead to the enforcement of the Production Code , as the newly formed organization the Catholic Legion of Decency threatened a boycott if it was not enforced.  Paramount cartoons produced by Fleischer Studios continued to be successful, with characters such as Betty Boop and Popeye the Sailor becoming widely successful. One Fleischer series, Screen Songs , featured live-action music stars under contract to Paramount hosting sing-alongs of popular songs. The animation studio would rebound with Popeye , and in 1935, polls showed that Popeye was even more popular than Mickey Mouse .  After an unsuccessful expansion into feature films, as well as the fact that Max and Dave Fleischer were no longer speaking to one another, Fleischer Studios was acquired by Paramount, which renamed the operation Famous Studios . That incarnation of the animation studio continued cartoon production until 1967, but has been historically dismissed as having largely failed to maintain the artistic acclaim the Fleischer brothers achieved under their management.  1941–50: United States v. Paramount Pictures, Inc. In 1940, Paramount agreed to a government-instituted consent decree: block booking and "pre-selling" (the practice of collecting up-front money for films not yet in production) would end. Immediately, Paramount cut back on production, from 71 films to a more modest 19 annually in the war years.  Still, with more new stars like Bob Hope , Alan Ladd , Veronica Lake , Paulette Goddard , and Betty Hutton , and with war-time attendance at astronomical numbers, Paramount and the other integrated studio-theatre combines made more money than ever. At this, the Federal Trade Commission and the Justice Department decided to reopen their case against the five integrated studios. Paramount also had a monopoly over Detroit movie theaters through subsidiary company United Detroit Theaters.  This led to the Supreme Court decision United States v. Paramount Pictures, Inc. (1948) holding that movie studios could not also own movie theater chains. This decision broke up Adolph Zuko's creation, with the theater chain being split into a new company, United Paramount Theaters , and effectively brought an end to the classic Hollywood studio system . 1951–66: Split and after With the separation of production and exhibition forced by the U.S. Supreme Court, Paramount Pictures Inc. was split in two.  Paramount Pictures Corporation was formed to be the production distribution company, with the 1,500-screen theater chain handed to the new United Paramount Theaters on December 31, 1949. Leonard Goldenson , who had headed the chain since 1938, remained as the new compan's president. The Balaban and Katz theatre division was spun off with UPT; its trademark eventually became the property of the Balaban and Katz Historical Foundation. The foundation later acquired ownership of the Famous Players trademark. Cash-rich and controlling prime downtown real estate, Goldenson began looking for investments. Barred from film-making by prior antitrust rulings, he acquired the struggling ABC television network in February 1953, leading it first to financial health, and eventually, in the mid-1970s, to first place in the national Nielsen ratings, before selling out to Capital Cities in 1985 (Capital Cities would eventually sell out, in turn, to The Walt Disney Company in 1996). United Paramount Theaters was renamed ABC Theaters in 1965 and was sold to businessman Henry Plitt in 1977. The movie theater chain was renamed Plitt Theaters. In 1985, Cineplex Odeon Corporation merged with Plitt. In later years, Paramoun's TV division would develop a strong relationship with ABC, providing many hit series to the network. Paramount Pictures had been an early backer of television, launching experimental stations in 1939 in Los Angeles and Chicago. The Los Angeles station eventually became KTLA , the first commercial station on the West Coast. The Chicago station got a commercial license as WBKB in 1943, but was sold to UPT along with Balaban & Katz in 1948 and was eventually resold to CBS as WBBM-TV . In 1938, Paramount bought a stake in television manufacturer DuMont Laboratories . Through this stake, it became a minority owner of the DuMont Television Network .  Paramount also launched its own network, Paramount Television Network , in 1948 through its television unit, Television Productions, Inc.  Paramount management planned to acquire additional owned-and-operated stations ("O&Os"); the company applied to the FCC for additional stations in San Francisco, Detroit, and Boston.  The FCC, however, denied Paramoun's applications. A few years earlier, the federal regulator had placed a five-station cap on all television networks: no network was allowed to own more than five VHF television stations. Paramount was hampered by its minority stake in the DuMont Television Network. Although both DuMont and Paramount executives stated that the companies were separate, the FCC ruled that Paramoun's partial ownership of DuMont meant that DuMont and Paramount were in theory branches of the same company. Since DuMont owned three television stations and Paramount owned two, the federal agency ruled neither network could acquire additional television stations. The FCC requested that Paramount relinquish its stake in DuMont, but Paramount refused.  According to television historian William Boddy, "Paramoun's checkered antitrust history" helped convince the FCC that Paramount controlled DuMont.  Both DuMont and Paramount Television Network suffered as a result, with neither company able to acquire five O&Os. Meanwhile, CBS, ABC, and NBC had each acquired the maximum of five stations by the mid-1950s.  When ABC accepted a merger offer from UPT in 1953, DuMont quickly realized that ABC now had more resources than it could possibly hope to match. It quickly reached an agreement in principle to merge with ABC.  However, Paramount vetoed the offer due to antitrust concerns.  For all intents and purposes, this was the end of DuMont, though it lingered on until 1956. In 1951, Paramount bought a stake in International Telemeter , an experimental pay TV service which operated with a coin inserted into a box. The service began operating in Palm Springs, California on November 27, 1953, but due to pressure from the FCC, the service ended on May 15, 1954.  With the loss of the theater chain, Paramount Pictures went into a decline, cutting studio-backed production, releasing its contract players, and making production deals with independents. By the mid-1950s, all the great names were gone; only Cecil B. DeMille , associated with Paramount since 1913, kept making pictures in the grand old style. Despite Paramoun's losses, DeMille would, however, give the studio some relief and create his most successful film at Paramount, a 1956 remake of his 1923 film The Ten Commandments .  DeMille died in 1959. Like some other studios, Paramount saw little value in its film library and sold 764 of its pre-1950 films to MCA Inc. / EMKA, Ltd. (known today as Universal Television ) in February 1958.  1966–70: Early Gulf+Western era By the early 1960s, Paramoun's future was doubtful. The high-risk movie business was wobbly; the theater chain was long gone; investments in DuMont and in early pay-television came to nothing; and the Golden Age of Hollywood had just ended, even the flagship Paramount Building in Times Square was sold to raise cash, as was KTLA (sold to Gene Autry in 1964 for a then-phenomenal $12.5 million). Their only remaining successful property at that point was Dot Records , which Paramount had acquired in 1957, and even its profits started declining by the middle of the 1960s.  Founding father Adolph Zukor (born in 1873) was still chairman emeritus; he referred to chairman Barney Balaban (born 1888) as "the boy". Such aged leadership was incapable of keeping up with the changing times, and in 1966, a sinking Paramount was sold to Charles Bluhdorn's industrial conglomerate, Gulf and Western Industries . Bluhdorn immediately put his stamp on the studio, installing a virtually unknown producer named Robert Evans as head of production. Despite some rough times, Evans held the job for eight years, restoring Paramoun's reputation for commercial success with The Odd Couple , Rosemar's Baby , Love Story , The Godfather , Chinatown , and 3 Days of the Condor .  Gulf and Western also bought the neighboring Desilu Productions television studio (once the lot of RKO Pictures ) from Lucille Ball in 1967. Using some of Desil's established shows such as Star Trek , Mission: Impossible , and Mannix as a foot in the door at the networks, the newly reincorporated Paramount Television eventually became known as a specialist in half-hour situation comedies.  In 1968, Paramount formed Films Distributing Corp to distribute sensitive film product, including Sin With a Stranger , which was one of the first films to receive an X rating in the United States when the MPAA introduced their new rating system .  1971–80: CIC formation and high-concept era In 1970, Paramount teamed with Universal Studios to form Cinema International Corporation , a new company that would distribute films by the two studios outside the United States. Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer would become a partner in the mid-1970s. Both Paramount and CIC entered the video market with Paramount Home Video (now Paramount Home Entertainment ) and CIC Video , respectively. Robert Evans abandoned his position as head of production in 1974; his successor, Richard Sylbert , proved to be too literary and too tasteful for Gulf and Wester's Bluhdorn. By 1976, a new, television-trained team was in place headed by Barry Diller and his "Killer-Dillers", as they were called by admirers or "Dillettes" as they were called by detractors. These associates, made up of Michael Eisner , Jeffrey Katzenberg , Dawn Steel and Don Simpson would each go on and head up major movie studios of their own later in their careers. The Paramount specialty was now simpler. " high concept " pictures such as Saturday Night Fever and Grease hit big, hit hard and hit fast all over the world,  while its fortuitous earlier acquisition of the Star Trek property, which had grown into a cult favorite , enabled Paramount to have a long running science fiction film and television franchise to compete with the outstanding popular success of Star Wars . Dille's television background led him to propose one of his longest-standing ideas to the board: Paramount Television Service , a fourth commercial network . Paramount Pictures purchased the Hughes Television Network (HTN) including its satellite time in planning for PTVS in 1976. Paramount sold HTN to Madison Square Garden Corporation in 1979.  But Diller believed strongly in the concept, and so took his fourth-network idea with him when he moved to 20th Century Fox in 1984, where Fo's then freshly installed proprietor, Rupert Murdoch was a more interested listener. However, the television division would be playing catch-up for over a decade after Dille's departure in 1984 before launching its own television network – UPN – in 1995. Lasting eleven years before being merged with The WB network to become The CW in 2006, UPN would feature many of the shows it originally produced for other networks, and would take numerous gambles on series such as Star Trek: Voyager and Star Trek: Enterprise that would have otherwise either gone direct-to-cable or become first-run syndication to independent stations across the country (as Star Trek: Deep Space Nine and Star Trek: The Next Generation were). Paramount Pictures was not connected to either Paramount Records (1910s–1935) or ABC-Paramount Records (1955–66) until it purchased the rights to use the name (but not the latte's catalog) in the late 1960s. The Paramount name was used for soundtrack albums and some pop re-issues from the Dot Records catalog which Paramount had acquired in 1957. By 1970, Dot had become an all-country label  and in 1974, Paramount sold all of its record holdings to ABC Records , which in turn was sold to MCA (now Universal Music Group ) in 1979.   1980–94: Continual success Paramoun's successful run of pictures extended into the 1980s and 1990s, generating hits like Airplane! , American Gigolo , Ordinary People , An Officer and a Gentleman , Flashdance , Terms of Endearment , Footloose , Pretty in Pink , Top Gun , Crocodile Dundee , Fatal Attraction , Ghost , the Friday the 13th slasher series, as well as joining forces with Lucasfilm and Steven Spielberg to create the Indiana Jones franchise. Other examples are the Star Trek film series and a string of films starring comedian Eddie Murphy like Trading Places , Coming to America and Beverly Hills Cop and its sequels . While the emphasis was decidedly on the commercial, there were occasional less commercial but more artistic and intellectual efforts like 'm Dancing as Fast as I Can , Atlantic City , Reds , Witness , Children of a Lesser God and The Accused . During this period, responsibility for running the studio passed from Eisner and Katzenberg to Frank Mancuso, Sr. (1984) and Ned Tanen (1984) to Stanley R. Jaffe (1991) and Sherry Lansing (1992). More so than most, Paramoun's slate of films included many remakes and television spin-offs ; while sometimes commercially successful, there have been few compelling films of the kind that once made Paramount the industry leader. Around the end of 1981, Paramount Pictures took over fellow Gulf and Western subsidiary Sega from the compan's manufacturing division in an effort to get into the video game business. Paramount would go on to sell Sega following the Video Game Crash of 1983 , and the two companies would later work together on the live action/CGI Sonic the Hedgehog film series.  On August 25, 1983, Paramount Studios caught fire. Two or three sound stages and four outdoor sets were destroyed.   When Charles Bluhdorn died unexpectedly, his successor Martin Davis dumped all of Gulf and Wester's industrial, mining, and sugar-growing subsidiaries and refocused the company, renaming it Paramount Communications in 1989. With the influx of cash from the sale of Gulf and Wester's industrial properties in the mid-1980s, Paramount bought a string of television stations and KECO Entertainment's theme park operations, renaming them Paramount Parks . These parks included Paramoun's Great America , Paramount Canad's Wonderland , Paramoun's Carowinds , Paramoun's Kings Dominion , and Paramoun's Kings Island .  In May 1985, Paramount decided to start its own talent department, an attempt to form a stable of exclusively-contracted film personnel (outside of Eddie Murphy ); this effort proved unsuccessful and studio president Dawn Steel decided to shut down the department on July 30, 1986.  In 1987, Paramount Pictures, MGM/UA Communications Co. and Universal Pictures teamed up in order to market feature film and television product to China, a response to the 25-billion admission tickets that were clocked in the country in 1986. Worldwide Media Sales, a division of the New York-based Worldwide Media Group had been placed in charge of the undertaking.  That year, Paramount Pictures decided to consolidate its distribution operations, closing a number of branch offices that were designed for the studio and relocating staff and major activities in an effort to cut costs and provide for a more efficient centralization; this decision was made in response to a change in distribution practices that had occurred among the various major studios.  In August 1987, Paramount Overseas Productions declared that the subsidiary would be in service not just for the upcoming film Experts , which was shot on a budget of $12 million in Canada , but also for other films filmed there worldwide, including the United Kingdom and Canada .  In 1993, Sumner Redstone's entertainment conglomerate Viacom made a bid for a merger with Paramount Communications; this quickly escalated into a bidding war with Barry Diller's QVC . But Viacom prevailed, ultimately paying $10 billion for the Paramount holdings. Viacom and Paramount had planned to merge as early as 1989.  Paramount is the last major film studio located in Hollywood proper. When Paramount moved to its present home in 1927, it was in the heart of the film community. Since then, former next-door neighbor RKO closed up shop in 1957 (Paramount ultimately absorbed their former lot); Warner Bros. (whose old Sunset Boulevard studio was sold to Paramount in 1949 as a home for KTLA ) moved to Burbank in 1930; Columbia joined Warners in Burbank in 1973 then moved again to Culver City in 1989; and the Pickford-Fairbanks-Goldwyn-United Artists lot, after a lively history, has been turned into a post-production and music-scoring facility for Warners, known simply as "The Lot". For a time the semi-industrial neighborhood around Paramount was in decline, but has now come back. The recently refurbished studio has come to symbolize Hollywood for many visitors, and its studio tour is a popular attraction. 1989–94: Paramount Communications In 1983, Gulf and Western began a restructuring process that would transform the corporation from a bloated conglomerate consisting of subsidiaries from unrelated industries to a more focused entertainment and publishing company. The idea was to aid financial markets in measuring the compan's success, which, in turn, would help place better value on its shares. Though its Paramount division did very well in recent years, Gulf and Wester's success as a whole was translating poorly with investors. This process eventually led Davis to divest many of the compan's subsidiaries. Its sugar plantations in Florida and the Dominican Republic were sold in 1985; the consumer and industrial products branch was sold off that same year.  In 1989, Davis renamed the company Paramount Communications Incorporated after its primary asset, Paramount Pictures.  In addition to the Paramount film, television, home video, and music publishing divisions, the company continued to own the Madison Square Garden properties (which also included MSG Network ), a 50% stake in USA Networks (the other 50% was owned by MCA / Universal Studios ) and Simon & Schuster, Prentice Hall , Pocket Books , Allyn & Bacon , Cineamerica (a joint venture with Warner Communications ), and Canadian cinema chain Famous Players Theatres .  That same year, the company launched a $12.2 billion hostile bid to acquire Time Inc. in an attempt to end a stock-swap merger deal between Time and Warner Communications. This caused Time to raise its bid for Warner to $14.9 billion in cash and stock. Gulf and Western responded by filing a lawsuit in a Delaware court to block the Time-Warner merger. The court ruled twice in favor of Time, forcing Gulf and Western to drop both the Time acquisition and the lawsuit, and allowing the formation of Time Warner . Paramount used cash acquired from the sale of Gulf and Wester's non-entertainment properties to take over the TVX Broadcast Group chain of television stations (which at that point consisted mainly of large-market stations which TVX had bought from Taft Broadcasting , plus two mid-market stations which TVX owned prior to the Taft purchase), and the KECO Entertainment chain of theme parks from Taft successor Great American Broadcasting. Both of these companies had their names changed to reflect new ownership: TVX became known as the Paramount Stations Group , while KECO was renamed to Paramount Parks . Paramount Television launched Wilshire Court Productions in conjunction with USA Networks, before the latter was renamed NBCUniversal Cable , in 1989. Wilshire Court Productions (named for a side street in Los Angeles) produced television films that aired on the USA Networks, and later for other networks. USA Networks launched a second channel, the Sci-Fi Channel (now known as Syfy ), in 1992. As its name implied, it focused on films and television series within the science fiction genre. Much of the initial programming was owned either by Paramount or Universal. Paramount bought one more television station in 1993: Cox Enterprises' WKBD-TV in Detroit, Michigan, at the time an affiliate of the Fox Broadcasting Company . 1994–2005: Dolgen/Lansing and "old" Viacom era In February 1994, Viacom acquired 50.1% of Paramount Communications Inc. shares for $9.75 billion, following a five-month battle with QVC , and completed the merger in July.    At the time, Paramoun's holdings included Paramount Pictures, Madison Square Garden , the New York Rangers , the New York Knicks , and the Simon & Schuster publishing house.  The deal had been planned as early as 1989, when the company was still known as Gulf and Western.  Though Davis was named a member of the board of National Amusements , which controlled Viacom, he ceased to manage the company. During this time period, Paramount Pictures went under the guidance of Jonathan Dolgen, chairman and Sherry Lansing , president.   During their administration over Paramount, the studio had an extremely successful period of films with two of Paramoun's ten highest-grossing films being produced during this period.  The most successful of these films, Titanic , co-produced with 20th Century Fox and Lightstorm Entertainment , became the highest-grossing film up to that time, grossing over $1.8 billion worldwide.  Also during this time, three Paramount Pictures films won the Academy Award for Best Picture; Titanic , Braveheart , and Forrest Gump . Paramoun's most important property, however, was Star Trek . Studio executives had begun to call it "the franchise" in the 1980s due to its reliable revenue, and other studios envied its "untouchable and unduplicatable" success. By 1998, Star Trek television shows, movies, books, videotapes, and licensing provided so much of the studi's profit that "it is not possible to spend any reasonable amount of time at Paramount and not be aware of  presence"; filming for Star Trek: Voyager and Star Trek: Deep Space Nine required up to nine of the largest of the studi's 36 sound stages .   : 49–50, 54 In 1995, Viacom and Chris-Craft Industries' United Television launched United Paramount Network (UPN) with Star Trek: Voyager as its flagship series, fulfilling Barry Dille's plan for a Paramount network from 25 years earlier. In 1999, Viacom bought out United Televisio's interests, and handed responsibility for the start-up network to the newly acquired CBS unit, which Viacom bought in 2000 – an ironic confluence of events as Paramount had once invested in CBS, and Viacom had once been the syndication arm of CBS, as well.  During this period the studio acquired some 30 TV stations to support the UPN network, also acquiring and merging in the assets of Republic Pictures, Spelling Television and Viacom Productions, almost doubling the size of the studi's television library. The television division produced the dominant prime time show for the decade in Frasier , as well as such long running hits as NCIS and Becker and the dominant prime time magazine show Entertainment Tonight. Paramount also gained the ownership rights to the Rysher library, after Viacom acquired the rights from Cox Enterprises . During this period, Paramount and its related subsidiaries and affiliates, operating under the name "Viacom Entertainment Group" also included the fourth largest group of theme parks in the United States and Canada which in addition to traditional rides and attractions launched numerous successful location-based entertainment units including a long running "Star Trek" attraction at the Las Vegas Hilton. Famous Music – the compan's celebrated music publishing arm almost doubled in size and developed artists including Pink, Bush, and Green Day, as well as catalog favorites including Duke Ellington and Henry Mancini. The Paramount/Viacom licensing group under the leadership of Tom McGrath created the "Cheers" franchise bars and restaurants and a chain of restaurants borrowing from the studi's Academy Award-winning film Forrest Gump – The Bubba Gump Shrimp Company . Through the combined efforts of Famous Music and the studio over ten "Broadway" musicals were created including Irving Berli's White Christmas , Footloose, Saturday Night Fever , Andrew Lloyd Webber's Sunset Boulevard among others. The compan's international arm, United International Pictures (UIP), was the dominant distributor internationally for ten straight years representing Paramount, Universal and MGM. Simon and Schuster became part of the Viacom Entertainment Group emerging as the United State' dominant trade book publisher. In 2002, Paramount; along with Buena Vista Distribution , 20th Century Fox , Sony Pictures Entertainment , MGM/UA Entertainment , Universal Studios , DreamWorks Pictures , Artisan Entertainment , Lions Gate Entertainment , and Warner Bros. formed the Digital Cinema Initiatives . Operating under a waiver from the antitrust law, the studios combined under the leadership of Paramount Chief Operating Officer Tom McGrath to develop technical standards for the eventual introduction of digital film projection – replacing the now 100-year-old film technology.  DCI was created "to establish and document voluntary specifications for an open architecture for digital cinema that ensures a uniform and high level of technical performance, reliability and quality control."  McGrath also headed up Paramoun's initiative for the creation and launch of the Blu-ray Disc. 2005–2019: "New" Viacom era Paramount Picture' studio lot in Hollywood (Melrose Gate entrance) On December 11, 2005, the Paramount Motion Pictures Group announced that it had purchased DreamWorks SKG (which was co-founded by former Paramount executive Jeffrey Katzenberg ) in a deal worth $1.6 billion. The announcement was made by Brad Grey , chairman and CEO of Paramount Pictures who noted that enhancing Paramoun's pipeline of pictures is a "key strategic objective in restoring Paramoun's stature as a leader in filmed entertainment."  While the agreement did not include DreamWorks Animation SKG Inc., the most profitable part of the company that went public the previous year, Paramount became the distributor of DreamWorks Animation films from 2006 to 2012, 20th Century Fox would take over distribution beginning in 2013 to 2017, followed by Universal Pictures permanently following NBCUniversal's acquisition of the studio in 2016  Reflecting in part the troubles of the broadcasting business, in 2005 Viacom wrote off over $18 billion from its radio acquisitions and, early that year, announced that it would split itself in two.  With that announcement, Dolgen and Lansing were replaced by former television executives Brad Grey and Gail Berman.   The Viacom board split the company into CBS Corporation and a separate company under the Viacom name. The board scheduled the division for the first quarter of 2006. Under the plan, CBS Corporation would comprise the CBS and UPN networks, Viacom Television Stations , Infinity Broadcasting Corporation , Viacom Outdoor , Paramount Television , King World Productions , Showtime Networks , Simon & Schuster , Paramount Parks , and CBS News . The revamped Viacom would include " MTV , VH1 , Nickelodeon , BET and several other cable networks, as well as the Paramount movie studio".  The split was completed on December 31, 2005.  Paramoun's home entertainment unit began using the CBS DVD brand for the Paramount Television library, as both Viacom and CBS Corporation were controlled by Sumner Redstone's National Amusements .  Grey also broke up the famous United International Pictures (UIP) international distribution company with 15 countries being taken over by Paramount or Universal by December 31, 2006, with the joint venture continuing in 20 markets. In Australia, Brazil, France, Ireland, Mexico, New Zealand and the United Kingdom, Paramount took over UIP. While in Austria, Belgium, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Russia, Spain and Switzerland, Universal took over and Paramount would build its own distribution operations there. In 2007 and 2008, Paramount may sub-distribute films via Universa's countries and vice versa. Paramoun's international distribution unit would be headquartered in Los Angeles and have a European hub.  In Italy, Paramount distributed through Universal.  With Universal indicated that it was pulling out of the UIP Korea and started its own operation there in November 2016, Paramount agreed to have CJ Entertainment distribute there.  UIP president and chief operating officer Andrew Cripps  was hired as Paramount Pictures International head. Paramount Pictures International distributed films that made the 1 billion mark in July 2007; the fifth studio that year to do so and it its first year.  On October 6, 2008, DreamWorks executives announced that they were leaving Paramount and relaunching an independent DreamWorks. The DreamWorks trademarks remained with DreamWorks Animation when that company was spun off before the Paramount purchase, and DreamWorks Animation transferred the license to the name to the new company.  DreamWorks films, acquired by Paramount but still distributed internationally by Universal, are included in Paramoun's market share. Grey also launched a Digital Entertainment division to take advantage of emerging digital distribution technologies. This led to Paramount becoming the second movie studio to sign a deal with Apple Inc. to sell its films through the iTunes Store .  Also, in 2007, Paramount sold another one of its "heritage" units, Famous Music , to Sony/ATV Music Publishing (best known for publishing many songs by The Beatles , and for being co-owned by Michael Jackson ), ending a nearly-eight-decade run as a division of Paramount, being the studi's music publishing arm since the period when the entire company went by the name "Famous Players".  In early 2008, Paramount partnered with Los Angeles-based developer FanRocket to make short scenes taken from its film library available to users on Facebook. The application, called VooZoo, allows users to send movie clips to other Facebook users and to post clips on their profile pages.  Paramount engineered a similar deal with Makena Technologies to allow users of vMTV and There.com to view and send movie clips.  In 2009, CBS Corporation stopped using the Paramount name in its series and changed the name of the production arm to CBS Television Studios , eliminating the Paramount name from television, to distance itself from the latter. In March 2010, Paramount founded Insurge Pictures , an independent distributor of "micro budget" films. The distributor planned ten movies with budgets of $100,000 each.  The first release was The Devil Inside , a movie with a budget of about US$1 million.  In March 2015, following waning box office returns, Paramount folded Insurge Pictures and its operations into the main studio.  In July 2011, in the wake of critical and box office success of the animated feature, Rango , and the departure of DreamWorks Animation upon completion of their distribution contract in 2012, Paramount announced the formation of a new division , devoted to the creation of animated productions.  It marks Paramoun's return to having its own animated division for the first time since 1967, when Paramount Cartoon Studios shut down (it was formerly Famous Studios until 1956).  In December 2013, Walt Disney Studios (via its parent company's purchase of Lucasfilm a year earlier)  gained Paramoun's remaining distribution and marketing rights to future Indiana Jones films. Paramount will permanently retain the distribution rights to the first four films and will receive "financial participation" from any additional films.  In February 2016, Viacom CEO and newly appointed chairman Philippe Dauman announced that the conglomerate is in talks to find an investor to purchase a minority stake in Paramount.  Sumner Redstone and his daughter Shari are reportedly opposed with the deal.  On July 13, 2016, Wanda Group was in talks to acquire a 49% stake of Paramount.  The talks with Wanda were dropped. On January 19, 2017, Shanghai Film Group Corp. and Huahua Media said they would finance at least 25% of all Paramount Pictures movies over a three-year period. Shanghai Film Group and Huahua Media, in the deal, would help distribute and market Paramoun's features in China. At the time, the Wall Street Journal wrote that "nearly every major Hollywood studio has a co-financing deal with a Chinese company."  On March 27, 2017, Jim Gianopulos was named as a chairman and CEO of Paramount Pictures, replacing Brad Grey .  In June 2017, Paramount Players was formed by the studio with the hiring of Brian Robbins , founder of AwesomenessTV , Tollin/Robbins Productions and Varsity Pictures, as the divisio's president. The division was expected to produce films based on the Viacom Media Networks properties including MTV , Nickelodeon , BET and Comedy Central .  In June 2017, Paramount Pictures signed a deal with 20th Century Fox for distribution of its films in Italy, which took effect on September. Prior to the deal, Paramoun's films in Italy were distributed by Universal Pictures , a deal that dates back to the CIC era.  On December 7, 2017, it was reported that Paramount sold the international distribution rights of Annihilation to Netflix .  Netflix subsequently bought the worldwide rights to The Cloverfield Paradox for $50 million.  On November 16, 2018, Paramount signed a multi-picture film deal with Netflix as part of Viaco's growth strategy, making Paramount the first major film studio to do so.  A sequel to Awesomeness Films' To All the Boys 've Loved Before is currently in development at the studio for Netflix.  In April 2018, Paramount posted its first quarterly profit since 2015.  Bob Bakish , CEO of parent Viacom, said in a statement that turnaround efforts "have firmly taken hold as the studio improved margins and returned to profitability. This mont's outstanding box-office performance of A Quiet Place , the first film produced and released under the new team at Paramount, is a clear sign of our progress." 2019–present: ViacomCBS/Paramount Global era On September 29, 2016, National Amusements sent a letter to both CBS Corporation and Viacom, encouraging the two companies to merge back into one company .  On December 12, the deal was called off.  On May 30, 2019, CNBC reported that CBS and Viacom would explore merger discussions in mid-June 2019.  Reports say that CBS and Viacom reportedly set August 8 as an informal deadline for reaching an agreement to recombine the two media companies.   CBS announced to acquire Viacom as part of the re-merger for up to $15.4 billion.  On August 2, 2019, the two companies agreed to remerge back into one entity,  which was named ViacomCBS; the deal was closed on December 4, 2019.  In December 2019, ViacomCBS agreed to purchase a 49% stake in Miramax that was owned by beIN Media Group , with Paramount gaining the distribution of the studi's 700-film library, as well as its future releases. Also, Paramount will produce television series based on Mirama's IPs.  The deal officially closed on April 3, 2020.  ViacomCBS later announced that it would rebrand the CBS All Access streaming service as Paramount+ to allow for international expansion using the widely recognized Paramount name and drawing from the studi's library, as well as that of CBS, MTV, Nickelodeon, and more.  Gianopulos was fired in September 2021 and replaced by Nickelodeon president Brian Robbins.  In January 2022, Paramount Pictures acquired the rights to Tomi Adeyemi's young adult fantasy novel Children of Blood and Bone from Lucasfilm and 20th Century Studios . As part of the acquisition, the film will have a guaranteed exclusive theatrical release while Adeyemi will write the screenplay and serve as executive producer. The film adaptation will also be produced by Temple Hill Entertainment and Sunswept Entertainment.   On February 16, 2022, ViacomCBS changed its name to Paramount Global , after the studio.  On March 8, 2022, Paramount Player' operations were folded into Paramount Pictures Motion Picture Group.  However, it will continue to operate as a label as it has several upcoming films on its slate. On November 15, 2022, Paramount entered a multi-year exclusive deal with former president of DC Films Walter Hamada . Hamada will oversee the development of horror films beginning in 2023.  Investments DreamWorks Pictures In 2006, Paramount became the parent of DreamWorks Pictures . Soros Strategic Partners and Dune Entertainment II soon afterwards acquired controlling interest in live-action films released through DreamWorks, with the release of Just Like Heaven on September 16, 2005. The remaining live-action films released until March 2006 remained under direct Paramount control. However, Paramount still owns distribution and other ancillary rights to Soros and Dune films. On February 8, 2010, Viacom repurchased Soro' controlling stake in DreamWork' library of films released before 2005 for around $400 million.  Even as DreamWorks switched distribution of live-action films not part of existing franchises to Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures and later Universal Pictures , Paramount continues to own the films released before the merger, and the films that Paramount themselves distributed, including sequel rights such as that of Little Fockers (2010), distributed by Paramount and DreamWorks. It was a sequel to two existing DreamWorks films, Meet the Parents (2000) and Meet the Fockers (2004). (Paramount only owned the international distribution rights to Little Fockers , whereas Universal Pictures handled domestic distribution).  Paramount also owned distribution rights to the DreamWorks Animation library of films made before 2013, and their previous distribution deal with future DWA titles expired at the end of 2012, with Rise of the Guardians . 20th Century Fox took over distribution for post-2012 titles beginning with The Croods (2013) and ending with Captain Underpants: The First Epic Movie (2017).  Universal Pictures subsequently took over distribution for DreamWorks Animatio's films beginning with How to Train Your Dragon: The Hidden World (2019) due to NBCUniversal's acquisition of the company in 2016. Paramoun's rights to the 1998–2012 DWA library would have expired 16 years after each fil's initial theatrical release date,  but in July 2014, DreamWorks Animation purchased Paramoun's distribution rights to the pre-2013 library, with 20th Century Fox distributing the library until January 2018, which Universal then assumed ownership of distribution rights.  Another asset of the former DreamWorks owned by Paramount is the pre-2008 DreamWorks Television library, which is currently distributed by Paramoun's sister company CBS Media Ventures ; it includes Spin City , High Incident , Freaks and Geeks , Undeclared and On the Lot . CBS library Independent company Hollywood Classics represents Paramount with the theatrical distribution of all the films produced by the various motion picture divisions of CBS over the years, as a result of the 2000 Viacom/CBS merger. Paramount has outright video distribution to the aforementioned CBS library with some exceptions; less-demanded content is usually released manufactured-on-demand by CBS themselves or licensed to Visual Entertainment Inc. As of the 2019 Viacom/CBS merger, this library now includes the theatrical distribution of Terrytoons short films on behalf of Paramount Animation , while CBS Media Ventures owns the television distribution. Until 2009, the video rights to My Fair Lady were with original theatrical distributor Warner Bros. , under license from CBS (the video license to that film has now reverted to Paramount). Units Divisions Paramount Pictures Paramount Home Entertainment Paramount Licensing, Inc. Paramount Pictures International Paramount Players Nickelodeon Movies BET Films Paramount Studio Group – physical studio and post production The Studios at Paramount – production facilities & lot Paramount on Location – production support facilities throughout North America including New York City, Vancouver, and Atlanta Worldwide Technical Operations – archives, restoration and preservation programs, the mastering and distribution fulfillment services, on-lot post production facilities management Paramount Parks & Resorts, licensing and design for parks and resorts  Paramount Animation  Paramount Music Joint ventures United International Pictures (co-owned with Comcast's Universal Pictures ) Rede Telecine (co-owned with Amazon's Metro-Goldwyn Mayer , The Walt Disney Company's The Walt Disney Company Latin America , Grupo Globo's Canais Globo and Comcas's Universal Pictures) Former divisions, subsidiaries, and joint ventures Paramount Digital Entertainment (Dormant) Paramount Television (original) (now CBS Studios ) Big Ticket Entertainment (semi-in-name-only since 2006; currently produces Judge Judy and Hot Bench ) Spelling Television (in-name-only since 2006) Viacom Productions (folded into PNT in 2004) Wilshire Court Productions (shut down in 2003) Paramount Domestic Television (now CBS Media Ventures ) Folded Viacom Enterprises in 1995 and Rysher Entertainment and Worldvision Enterprises in 1999 RTV News, Inc., producer of Real TV and Maximum Exposure United Paramount Network (UPN) – formerly a joint venture with United Television , now part of Nexstar/Paramount Global/Warner Bros. Discovery joint venture The CW Television Network Paramount Stations Group (now CBS Television Stations ) USA Networks (also including the Sci-Fi Channel ) – Paramount owned a stake starting in 1982, 50% owner (with Universal Pictures ) from 1987 until 1997, when Paramount/Viacom sold their stake to Universal (now part of NBCUniversal ) Paramount International Television (merged with CBS Broadcast International in 2004 to form CBS Studios International ) Fleischer Studios – purchased in 1942 and organized as Famous Studios (which shut down in 1967); library folded into Paramount Animation . Terrytoons – purchased by CBS Films (later Viacom International ) in 1956; theatrical library moved to Paramount Animation following re-merger of ViacomCBS in 2019. Paramount Famous Productions – direct-to-video division Paramount Parks (Purchased by Cedar Fair Entertainment Company in 2006) Paramount Classics/Paramount Vantage  – Paramount Classics merged into Paramount Vantage; the latter then went dormant in December 2013 DW Studios, LLC (also DW Pictures) – defunct, holding film library and rights, principal officers left to recreate DreamWorks as an independent company DW Funding LLC – DreamWorks live-action library (pre-09/16/2005; DW Funding, LLC) sold to Soros Strategic Partners and Dune Entertainment II and purchased back in 2010  Go Fish Pictures – Arthouse / Independent film unit for used distributing DreamWorks Pictures foreign films; defunct in 2007 after parent compan's sale Paramount Theatres Limited – Founded 1930 in the United Kingdom with the opening of a cinema in Manchester . Several Paramount Theatres had opened or had been acquired in the United Kingdom during the 1930s before being sold to The Rank Organisation becoming part of the Odeon Cinemas chain in 1939. Epix – 49.76% owner (with Metro–Goldwyn–Mayer and Lionsgate ) from 2009 until 2017, when Paramount/Viacom and Lionsgate sold their stakes to MGM Insurge Pictures – micro-budget film division (March 2010 – 2015);  absorbed into Paramount itself Republic Pictures "Continental Café" – the commissary run by Pauline Kessinger until the cafe was replaced by the Zukor Building in 1983.  Other interests In March 2012, Paramount licensed their name and logo to a luxury hotel investment group which subsequently named the company Paramount Hotels and Resorts. The investors plan to build 50 hotels throughout the world based on the themes of Hollywood and the California lifestyle. Among the features are private screening rooms and the Paramount library available in the hotel rooms. In April 2013, Paramount Hotels and Dubai-based DAMAC Properties announced the building of the first resort: "DAMAC Towers by Paramount."   Logo Artist Dario Campanile poses with a picture Paramount commissioned him in 1986 to paint for its 75th anniversary. The company later used the painting as a basis for its new logo. That logo was introduced as a prototype in the 1986 film The Golden Child ; the 1987 film Critical Condition was the first to feature the finalized version of the logo. 199's South Park: Bigger, Longer & Uncut was the first to use an enhanced version of the logo, which was last used on 200's Crossroads . The distinctively pyramidal Paramount mountain has been the mainstay of the compan's production logo since its inception and is the oldest surviving Hollywood film logo. In the sound era, the logo was accompanied by a fanfare called Paramount on Parade after the film of the same name, released in 1930. The words to the fanfare, originally sung in the 1930 film, were "Proud of the crowd that will never be loud, i's Paramount on Parade." Legend has it that the mountain is based on a doodle made by W. W. Hodkinson during a meeting with Adolph Zukor . It is said to be based on the memories of his childhood in Utah . Some claim that Uta's Ben Lomond is the mountain Hodkinson doodled, and that Per's Artesonraju  is the mountain in the live-action logo, while others claim that the Italian side of Monviso inspired the logo. Some editions of the logo bear a striking resemblance to the Pfeifferhorn ,  another Wasatch Range peak, and to the Matterhorn on the border between Switzerland and Italy . Mount Huntington in Alaska also bears a striking resemblance. The motion picture logo has gone through many changes over the years: The logo began as a somewhat indistinct charcoal rendering of the mountain ringed with superimposed stars. The logo originally had twenty-four stars, as a tribute to the then current system of contracts for actors , since Paramount had twenty-four stars signed at the time. In 1951, the logo was redesigned as a matte painting created by Jan Domela . A newer, more realistic-looking logo debuted in 1953 for Paramount films made in 3D. It was reworked in early-to-mid 1954 for Paramount films made in widescreen process VistaVision . The text VistaVision – Motion Picture High Fidelity was often imposed over the Paramount logo briefly before dissolving into the title sequence . In early 1968, the text "A Paramount Picture/Release" was shortened to "Paramount", the byline A Gulf+Western Company appeared on the bottom, and the number of stars being reduced to 22. In 1974, another redesign was made, with the Paramount text and Gulf+Western byline appearing in different fonts. In September 1975, the logo was simplified in a shade of blue, adopting the modified design of the 1968 print logo, which was in use for many decades afterward. A version of the print logo had been in use by Paramount Television since 1968. A black and white logo with "A Paramount Picture" appeared in the 1980 live action film Popeye , resembling the one used on Paramoun's classic Popeye cartoon shorts . The studio launched an entirely new logo in December 1986 with computer-generated imagery of a lake and stars. This version of the Paramount logo was designed by Dario Campanile and animated by Flip Your Lid Animation (Studio Productions), Omnibus/Abel for the CGI stars and Apogee, Inc for the mountain; for this logo, the stars would move across the screen into the arc shape instead of it being superimposed over the mountain as it was before. A redone version of this logo by Pittard Sullivan made its debuted with South Park: Bigger, Longer & Uncut , released on June 30, 1999. For its 90th anniversary, Paramount adopted the logo shown here. In 2012, it was used in tandem with the current one. This picture shows the 2010 modification of the logo, which includes Viacom's revised byline introduced in 2006. The first film to use the revised Viacom byline was Iron Man 2 . In March 2002, an updated logo by BUF Compagnie was introduced in which shooting stars would fall from a night sky to form the arc while the Paramount logo would fly into place between them. An enhanced version of this logo made by PIC Collective debuted with Iron Man 2 , released on May 7, 2010. The south col area of Mount Everest became the primary basis. The music is accompanied by Paramount on Parade , which was only used on Mean Girls . This logo continued to be featured on DVD and Blu-ray releases with the first incarnation of Viacom byline until March 5, 2019, ending with Instant Family . [ citation needed ] On December 16, 2011, an updated logo    was introduced with animation done by Devastudios, using Terragen and Autodesk Maya .  The new logo includes a surrounding mountain range and the sun shining in the background. Michael Giacchino composed the log's new fanfare. His work on the fanfare was carried onto the Paramount Players and Paramount Animation logos, as well as the Paramount Television Studios logo, which is also used for the Paramount Network Original Productions logo with 68 Whiskey . The word "Pictures" was restored to the bottom of the Paramount logo in 2022 after ViacomCBS took on the Paramount name and branding for its entire operation; this revised logo used for printed materials and merchandising, while still appearing as simply "Paramount" on-screen, no longer uses the byline. Studio tours Paramount Studios offers tours of their studios.  The 2-hour Studio Tour offers, as the name implies, a regular tour of the studio.  The stages where Samson and Delilah , Sunset Blvd. , White Christmas , Rear Window , Sabrina , Breakfast at Tiffan's , and many other classic films were shot are still in use today. The studi's backlot features numerous blocks of façades that depict a number of New York City locales, such as "Washington Square", "Brooklyn", and "Financial District". The After Dark Tour involves a tour of the Hollywood Forever Cemetery .  Film library Main article: Lists of Paramount Pictures films A few years after the ruling of the United States v. Paramount Pictures, Inc. case in 1948, Music Corporation of America ( MCA ) approached Paramount offering $50 million for 750 sound feature films released prior to December 1, 1949, with payment to be spread over a period of several years. Paramount saw this as a bargain since the fleeting movie studio saw very little value in its library of old films at the time. To address any antitrust concerns, MCA set up EMKA, Ltd. as a dummy corporation to sell these films to television. EMK's/Universal Televisio's library includes the five Paramount Marx Brothers films, most of the Bob Hope–Bing Crosby Road to... pictures, and other classics such as Trouble in Paradise , Shanghai Express , She Done Him Wrong , Sulliva's Travels , The Palm Beach Story , For Whom the Bell Tolls , Double Indemnity , The Lost Weekend , and The Heiress . The studio has produced many critically acclaimed films such as Titanic , Footloose , Breakfast at Tiffan's , Braveheart , Ghost , The Truman Show , Mean Girls , Psycho , Rocketman , Ferris Buelle's Day Off , The Curious Case of Benjamin Button , Days of Thunder , Rosemar's Baby , Sunset Boulevard , Forrest Gump , Coming to America , World War Z , Babel , The Conversation , The Fighter , Interstellar , Terms of Endearment , The Wolf of Wall Street and A Quiet Place ; as well as the Godfather , Star Trek , and Mission: Impossible film series. Film series Highest-grossing films ‡ — Includes theatrical reissue(s) Latino and Hispanic representation On July 31, 2018, Paramount was targeted by the National Hispanic Media Coalition and the National Latino Media Council, which have both claimed that the studio has the worst track record of hiring Latino and Hispanic talent both in front of and behind the camera (the last Paramount film directed by a Spanish director was Rings in 2017). In response, Paramount released the statement: "We recently met with NHMC in a good faith effort to see how we could partner as we further drive Paramoun's culture of diversity, inclusion, and belonging. Under our new leadership team, we continue to make progress — including ensuring representation in front of and behind the camera in upcoming films such as Dora the Explorer , Instant Family , Bumblebee , and Limited Partners – and welcome the opportunity to build and strengthen relationships with the Latino creative community further."    The NHMC protested at the Paramount Pictures lot on August 25. More than 60 protesters attended, while chanting "Latinos excluded, time to be included!". NHMC president and CEO Alex Nogales vowed to continue the boycott until the studio signed a memorandum of understanding.  On October 17, the NHMC protested at the Paramount film lot for the second time in two months, with 75 protesters attending. The leaders delivered a petition signed by 12,307 people and addressed it to Jim Gianopulos.  See also Portals : Companies United States Los Angeles Greater Los Angeles California Film CBS Studios Paramount Television Studios List of Paramount executives List of Paramount Global television programs

2024 film by Reinaldo Marcus Green Bob Marley: One Love is a 2024 American biographical drama musical film based on the life of reggae singer and songwriter Bob Marley , played by Kingsley Ben-Adir , from his rise to fame in the mid-1970s up until his death in 1981. The film is directed by Reinaldo Marcus Green , who co-wrote the screenplay with Terence Winter , Frank E. Flowers , and Zach Baylin . It also stars Lashana Lynch as Rita Marley , and James Norton as Chris Blackwell . Bob Marley: One Love premiered at the Carib 5 in Kingston, Jamaica on January 23, 2024, and was released in the United States by Paramount Pictures on February 14, 2024. It received mixed reviews from critics and grossed $179 million worldwide. Plot [ edit ] In 1976, amidst armed political conflict that is affecting daily life in Jamaica, Bob Marley announces he will perform at a concert, Smile Jamaica , promoting peace amongst the warring factions. While preparing for the concert, Marley, his wife Rita , and several other members of his band are shot by assailants . Rita and Marley are hospitalized, but survive and recover from their injuries in time for the concert. After performing, Marley, saddened that his own countrymen would try to kill him and his wife, shows the crowd his bullet wounds before walking off stage. He tells Rita to take their children to Delaware in the United States and stay with his mom, as he and the rest of his band venture to London. After struggling to come up with a new album concept, Marley asks Rita to rejoin him and the band in England, and taking inspiration from the soundtrack of the film Exodus and their own situation, he and the band begin recording what would become their album of the same name . The album becomes a hit and helps further popularize reggae music and the Rastafari movement around the world. When the recording company schedules a tour in Europe, Marley also aims for stops throughout Africa to inspire the people there. This leads to friction with Rita as she and Marley argue about his responsibilities and both his and Rit's infidelities, in addition to having given up on promoting peace back in Jamaica. Marley also gets into an altercation with manager Don Taylor over a financial dispute. After a toenail infection raises concern from Rita and his record producer Chris Blackwell , Marley is later diagnosed with a rare skin cancer . Blackwell confronts Marley about treatment choices, reluctantly dismissed by a firm Marley. Faced with his own mortality, Marley reconciles with Rita and Taylor and finally decides to return to Jamaica in 1978, where he is welcomed back by a crowd at the airport. Back home, the gunman who had shot him and the others arrives and begs for forgiveness, to which Marley states he "keeps no vengeance". After Marley debuts a song to Rita and the children about reconciliation, she finally deems him ready to perform a peace concert. The film ends as Marley and his band gear up to perform again for the Jamaican crowd with the song " One Love ". A pre-credits montage shows clips of the real Marley and his band during the One Love Peace Concert , which sees them joined on-stage by the heads of both of Jamaic's political parties, also revealing that Marley and his band were able to perform  in Zimbabwe to celebrate the natio's independence before he died of his cancer in 1981 at the age of 36. Cast [ edit ] Kingsley Ben-Adir as Bob Marley  Quan-Dajai Henriques as teenage Bob Nolan Collignon as young Bob Lashana Lynch as Rita Marley  Nia Ashi as teenage Rita James Norton as Chris Blackwell  Tosin Cole as Tyrone Downie Aston Barrett Jr. as Aston "Family Man" Barrett Anthony Welsh as Don Taylor Hector Roots Lewis as Carlton Carly Barrett  Alexx A-Game as Peter Tosh Narado Williams as teenage Peter Abijah "Naki Wailer" Livingston as Bunny Wailer Courtney Edwards as teenage Bunny Stefan A.D Wade as Seeco Patterson Matthew Malcolm Blake as young Seeco Sevana as Judy Mowatt  Michael Gandolfini as Howard Bloom Nadine Marshall as Cedella Malcolm Umi Myers as Cindy Breakspeare Gawaine "J-Summa" Campbell as Antonio "Gillie" Gilbert Naomi Cowan as Marcia Griffiths David Kerr as Junior Marvin Sheldon Sheperd as Neville Garrick Andrae Simpson as Donald Kinsey Jeff Crossley as Clement "Coxsone" Dodd Sundra Oakley as Diane Jobson Production [ edit ] Development [ edit ] In June 2018, it was announced that Paramount Pictures was developing a biographical drama film based on the life of singer and songwriter Bob Marley , with Marle's son Ziggy Marley serving as a producer.  In March 2021, Reinaldo Marcus Green had been hired to direct, with Zach Baylin (who wrote Gree's 2021 film King Richard ), Frank E. Flowers , and Terence Winter writing the screenplay.   In February 2022, Kingsley Ben-Adir was cast as the titular character, after an extensive, yearlong and globe-spanning search by the studio.  In August, Lashana Lynch had joined the cast playing as Bo's wife Rita Marley .  In February 2023, Michael Gandolfini , Nadine Marshall , James Norton and Anthony Welsh had joined the cast.  Filming [ edit ] Principal photography began in December 2022 in London   and Jamaica and wrapped in April 2023.   The fil's title, Bob Marley: One Love , was announced by producer Ziggy Marley at CinemaCon that same month.   Music [ edit ] Main article: Bob Marley: One Love (soundtrack) In October 2023, it was reported that Kris Bowers had composed the fil's score, after working with Green on Monsters and Men (2018) and King Richard .  On January 26, 2024, American country singer Kacey Musgraves released a cover of the Wailers' " Three Little Birds " (1977), part of the fil's soundtrack.  The soundtrack EP of the film was released on February 14, 2024, by Island Records and Tuff Gong .  Release [ edit ] Bob Marley: One Love held its world premiere in Marle's hometown of Kingston, Jamaica , on January 23, 2024.  It was released theatrically in the United States on February 14, 2024.  It was originally scheduled to be released on January 12, 2024.  It was released in the United Kingdom on February 14, 2024.  Home media [ edit ] It premiered on Paramount+ and MGM+ in the US and Canada on April 12, 2024, with a linear streaming on the same day. It was released on 4K Ultra HD, DVD and Blu-ray on May 28, 2024 by Paramount Home Entertainment . Reception [ edit ] Box office [ edit ] Bob Marley: One Love grossed $96.9 million in the United States and Canada, and $82.5 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $179.4 million.  In the United States and Canada, One Love was released alongside Madame Web , and was initially projected to gross $30–35 million from 3,536 theaters over its six-day opening frame.  The film made $14 million on its first day, a Valentin's Day mid-week record (surpassing The Vow' s $11.5 million in 2012), and $3.8 million on its second.   After making $7.5 million on Friday, six-day estimates were raised to $46 million. It went on to debut to $51 million over its first six days (including $27.7 million in its opening weekend), finishing first at the box office and marking one of the best openings for a music biopic.  In its second weekend the film made $13.5 million (a drop of 53%), remaining in first.  It made $7.4 million in its third weekend, finishing second behind newcomer Dune: Part Two .  In Jamaica, the fil's opening day gross of $100,000 and an 89% market share set a record for the biggest box office opening of all-time in the country.    Critical response [ edit ] On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , 44% of 185 critic' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 5.4/10. The websit's consensus reads: "Kingsley Ben-Adir does an admirable job in the central role, but Bob Marley: One Love is ultimately a standard biopic that does't do justice to its brilliant subject."  Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned the film a score of 43 out of 100, based on 36 critics, indicating "mixed or average" reviews.  Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale, while those polled at PostTrak gave it a 91% positive score, with 80% saying they would definitely recommend the film.   Lovia Gyarkye of The Hollywood Reporter wrote: "[Ben-Adir] wholly conjures Marle's charisma while also teasing the musicia's sense of isolation, stemming from a childhood marked by abandonment. His compelling performance enlivens a film that otherwise feels like i's perpetually struggling to take off."  Javier Ocaña of El País called the film "a serviceable biopic that is saved by its soundtrack"  while Expresso thought it "showed the man beyond the myth".  Brian Lowry of CNN called the film "a dutiful addition to a recent wave of such biographies (see Rocketman and Bohemian Rhapsody ), but a largely uninspired one."  The Age's Jake Wilson gave it 1.5/5 stars, calling it a "routine biopic" and writing, "considering this is unlikely to be the last attempt to dramatise Marle's life story, next time it would't hurt if a Jamaican filmmaker had a go."  The Atlantic's Hannah Giorgis wrote, " One Love might offer a less daunting entry point than Marley , which can feel intimidating in its scope. But his music and ideas—and all the people who helped usher them into this fractured world—deserve better."

2024 Indian Malayalam-language film Manjummel Boys is a 2024 Indian Malayalam -language survival thriller film written and directed by Chidambaram . It is produced by Soubin Shahir , Babu Shahir and Shawn Antony under Parava Films. The film stars an ensemble cast , which includes Soubin Shahir , Sreenath Bhasi , Balu Varghese , Ganapathi S. Poduval , Lal Jr. , Deepak Parambol , Abhiram Radhakrishnan , Arun Kurian , Khalid Rahman and Shebin Benson . It is based on a true incident from 2006.  The film follows a group of friends from a small town called Manjummel near Kochi , who decide to have a vacation in Kodaikanal , which is affected when one of them becomes trapped in the Guna Caves . The film was theatrically released on 22 February 2024 in Kerala and Tamil Nadu , and received critical acclaim.  It became the first film in the Malayalam film industry to earn more than ₹200 crore, and set several box-office records, becoming the the highest grossing Malayalam film ever , surpassing the record set by 2018 .  It also emerged as one of the highest-grossing Indian films of 2024 . Plot [ edit ] In 2006, a group of 10 friends from an arts club in Kochi leave on a trip to Kodaikanal in the neighbouring state of Tamil Nadu , during the Onam vacation. They explore Kodaikanal and before leaving, one of the friends, Sudhi tells them about Guna Caves , a place where the film Gunaa was shot. Inebriated, high and happy, the friends reach Guna Caves and decide to explore the restricted areas of the caves by themselves despite a warning from Dominic, a tourist guide . Though there are signs of a lurking danger, the friends explore further. Upon reaching a point, a few friends decide to etch down their group name "Manjummel Boys" on the rocks within the cave. After etching it on the wall, the friends call out to show the remaining guys who are exploring on the other sides to take a picture and they all regroup. Subhash, one of the friends, falls into a covered hole in the ground while moving towards them. Initially everyone assumes he is pulling a prank, but as he does not respond even after calling out to him multiple times, they all start to panic. After the initial shock, a few of them run back to get help and others stay and continue calling out to him in hopes that he would respond. They inform the locals of what happened and ask them for help, and they all suggest going to the police station and forest guard . The locals also inform them that the specific area was off-limits to people for a reason and that so far 13 people have fallen into that hole and none were ever recovered, dead or alive. They mention that the British had called Guna Caves as The Devi's Kitchen due to this reason and that the particular hole is over 900 feet deep. Scared even more, the friends reach the local police station, where they are beaten; the police file an FIR against them for entering a restricted area. They are also accused of murdering Subhash and giving false complaints and no help is offered. Meanwhile, rain starts to flood the hole. Finally after being convinced, and fearing backlash from the local people for failing to help, one of the police officers agrees to go with them to the cave. On the way, he informs them that the last person who fell into the hole was the former Central Ministe's nephew around ten years ago and all the forces had gotten together to rescue him, but no one had been able to. The police officer, after inspecting the hole, suggests that they leave Subhash as he probably is no longer alive, but the friends are adamant about rescuing him. But soon one of the boys, Sixen hears Subhas's cries and informs others that he is alive and the police are also convinced to try and save him. The fire department and more police officers are also called into the scene.They estimate that Subhash has fallen down into a depth of around 120 feet. They try lowering the rope, for Subhash to hold, but are sceptical that he may not be in a situation to hold on to the rope after a deep fall. They are scared to go inside the hole to retrieve him. Seeing this, one of the friends, Siju David, decides to go down. The police officers are initially reluctant, but finally agree after being convinced by the friends and the locals. Kuttan is lowered into the hole, but along the way, the rope with which Kuttan is lowered runs out, and police are worried that it is unsafe to go any lower as there might be low oxygen levels , and they are not willing to risk Kuttan’s life as well. However, Kuttan states that he can hear Subhas's voice clearly and that he cannot leave him down there. The police arrange for more rope and reel Kuttan down further. At 120 feet, Kuttan is able to see Subhash barely lying on a ledge covered in blood and muddy water due to the rain. Kuttan is able to retrieve him and the rest of the friends pull them up together successfully. After receiving first aid from the nearest clinic, they take Subhash to the hospital in their hometown, where he is treated more thoroughly. They decide not to tell anyone about the incident and tells Subhas's family that he fell in a waterfall. Subhash suffers trauma from the fall and is not able to sleep initially, but slowly starts recovering after going to trauma therapy. Later, the news that Kuttan saved Subhash comes out from a person who went to Tamil Nadu and Kuttan is applauded for his bravery. 2 years later Kuttan is awarded the Jeevan Raksha Padak for his actions. Cast [ edit ] Soubin Shahir as Siju David aka "Kuttan" Kevin as Young Kuttan Sreenath Bhasi as Subhash Dilan Derin George as 10 year old Subhash Dian Derin George as 5 year old Subhash Balu Varghese as Sixen Ganapathi as Krishnakumar aka "Kannan" Sathvik as Young Kannan Lal Jr. as Siju Deepak Parambol as Sudhi Abhiram Radhakrishnan as Anil Arun Kurian as Sujith Chandu Salimkumar as Abhilash Vishnu Reghu as Jinson Khalid Rahman as Prasad, taxi driver Pooja Mohanraj as studio girl Shebin Benson as Mejo George Maryan as Arumugam, a local seller Kathiresan as Head constable Ramachandran Durairaj as Dominic, a local guide Vijay Gaura as Rathnavel, a local tourist photographer Vijay Muthu as Sub-Inspector Karthika Vellathery as bride Mani as Forest range officer Sasikumar as Police officer Vijayalakshmi as Valli, the tea stall lady The real Manjummel Boys made a cameo appearance as the opposing gang during the tug of war contest.  Production [ edit ] Development [ edit ] The project was initially reported in January 2023 by The New Indian Express , which was the second of Chidambaram after Jan. E. Man (2021).  Soubin Shahir and Sreenath Bhasi were roped to play the lead roles, in their fifth collaboration following Parava (2017), Kumbalangi Nights , Virus (2019), and Bheeshma Parvam (2022). Soubin also produced the film with his father Babu Shahir and producer-distributor Shawn Antony under their maiden production house Parava Films.  Cinematographer Shyju Khalid , musician Sushin Shyam , editor Vivek Harshan and production designer Ajayan Chalissery were announced as a part of the technical crew.   Filming [ edit ] Although the film was shot at a production studio some parts of the film was shot at the real Guna Cave Itself. Interior view (Bottom) and exterior view (Top) Principal photography commenced at Kodaikanal on 26 January 2023 and concluded on 17 July.  The film was shot around 101 working days throughout multiple schedules.  A few scenes were also shot in Kochi and Perumbavoor .  The cave and its surrounding shown in the film is actually set constructed by production designer Ajayan Chalissery.  Music [ edit ] The original score and soundtrack of Manjummel Boys is composed by Sushin Shyam . It features two tracks, which were sung by Pradeep Kumar and rapper Vedan. The lyrics were penned by Anwar Ali and Vedan. In this film, the 1991 Tamil film Gunaa is also mentioned many times, especially through the song "Kanmani Anbodu Kadhalan".  Release [ edit ] Manjummel Boys was theatrically released on 22 February 2024.  Prior to the fil's theatrical release, the Film Exhibitors Union Organisation of Kerala (FEUOK) announced that they would halt the screening of Malayalam-language films in theatres owing to the Kerala Film Producers Association (KFPA) and Film Distributors Associatio's decision to not to screen films that would be released in streaming platforms in less than 42 days.  Eventually, KFPA affirmed on the fil's release in specific theatres which followed the contractual agreements.  Prior to the fil's release, it garnered ₹ 1.47 crore (US$180,000) from advance bookings across Kerala.  The Telugu -language dubbed version was released on 6 April 2024.  Distribution [ edit ] It was released by Sree Gokulam Movies through Dream Big Films in Kerala and Tamil Nadu . The overseas rights acquired by Phars Film Co. It was distributed across Andhra Pradesh and Telangana by Mythri Movie Makers , Sukumar Writings and Primeshow Entertainment.  Home media [ edit ] The streaming rights and satellite rights were acquired by Disney+ Hotstar and Asianet , respectively.  The film began streaming on Disney+ Hotstar from 5 May 2024 in Malayalam and dubbed versions of Tamil, Telugu, Kannada and Hindi languages.  Reception [ edit ] Box office [ edit ] Soubin Shahir and Sreenath Bhasi got appreciation for their role as Kuttan and Subhash in the Film On the opening day of its release, the film earned a net collection of ₹ 3.3 crore (US$400,000) and gross collection of ₹ 3.9 crore (US$470,000), while also earning ₹ 2.1 crore (US$250,000) from overseas markets.  At the second day, the film garnered ₹ 3.25 crore (US$390,000), a marginal drop of 1.52% in comparison with the previous da's release, but saw an upward trend on the third and fourth day, garnering around ₹ 4.25 crore (US$510,000) and ₹ 4.75 crore (US$570,000). The film earned ₹ 15.5 crore (US$1.9 million) within the first four days of its release in the domestic regions, while also earning ₹ 13.25 crore (US$1.6 million).  At the end of the first week, the film crossed ₹50 crore at the worldwide box office, earning ₹ 28 crore (US$3.4 million) domestically and ₹ 22 crore (US$2.6 million) from overseas.  By March 2024, the film crossed ₹100 crore.  As of 21 March 2024, Manjummel Boys has grossed a worldwide total of ₹200 crore (US$25 million).  In Tamil Nadu, the film garnered ₹ 1 crore (US$120,000) at the box office in the first weekend.  Within ten days, the film earned ₹ 15 crore (US$1.8 million), thereby becoming the highest-grossing Malayalam film in the state.  Film analysts and exhibitors attributed the success of the film which was primarily attributed to 60% of the film being set in Tamil Nadu which connected with the local audiences, along with the nostalgia, themes and emotional connect with family audience and youngsters, and popular references to Tamil cinema, primilarily Gunaa , which was shot in the Gunaa caves.   Exhibitors further described that the lack of notable Tamil films and the releases during February and March 2024 not performing well as expected were the contributing factors for the fil's overperformance in the state.  Critical response [ edit ] Manjummel Boys received critical acclaim from critics with praise for its technical aspects, acting, script and direction. S. Devasankar of Pinkvilla gave 4/5 stars and wrote " Manjummel Boys is one of the finest additions to Malayalam survival thriller films. The film demands a theater watch with the best sound quality for the best experience, and is sure to leave the audience shook".  Gopika I. S. of The Times of India gave 4/5 stars and wrote " Manjummel Boys is't your average friendship flick packed like a survival film. If you are looking for a crisp survival film, this is it. I's an absolute marvel of visuals, absolutely good writing, characterisation, editing, acting and all the thrills".  Arjun Menon of Rediff gave 4/5 stars and wrote "Manjummel Boys gets so many things right that the small nitpicks do't amount to much in the larger picture".  Sanjith Sridharan of OTTplay gave 3 + 1 ⁄ 2 / 5 stars and wrote "Chidambaram has't tried to overdramatise Manjummel Boys for the sake of entertainment and has kept it mostly true to the events that had transpired in Kodaikanal in 2006".  Anandu Suresh of The Indian Express gave 3/5 stars and wrote "Despite its shortcomings, Chidambara's film can indeed be seen as a powerful tribute to the real Manjummel Boys and their determined efforts to save their dear one".  Janani K. of India Today gave 3/5 stars and wrote "Director Chidambara's Manjummel Boys is a heartwarming thriller which is earnest in its attempt".  S. R. Praveen of The Hindu wrote "Though the survival thriller part brings back memories of Bharatha's Malootty , this one takes a different path by tying the events closely to their friendship of the characters".  Princy Alexander of Onmanorama wrote "Overall, the movie is a neatly crafted tale of friendship that triumphs over the survival drama".  The real life Manjummel Boys make a cameo appearance as the opposing gang during a tug of war contest.  Controversies [ edit ] The producers of the film were arraigned by the Marad police to inquire about alleged cheating and forgery. FIR was filed against Soubin Shahir, Babu Shahir and Shawn Antony.  On 17 May 2024, the Kerala High Court stayed the proceedings for a month based on the petition filed by the Defendant seeking to quash the criminal case.  On 22 May 2024, music composer Ilaiyaraaja issued a formal notice to the producers of Manjummel Boys for the unauthorized use of his song "Kanmani Anbodu Kaadhalan" from Gunaa . The notice, addressed to Soubin Shahir , Babu Shahir, and Shawn Antony of Parava Films, asserts Ilaiyaraaj's legal and moral rights over the song and reserves the right to initiate legal action.

Welcome to Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit . 6,849,038 articles in English From toda's featured article DeLancey W. Gill (1859–1940) was an American drafter , landscape painter , and photographer. As a teenager, he moved in with an aunt in Washington, D.C. , after his mother and stepfather traveled west. He eventually found himself employed as an architectural draftsman for the Treasury . He created sketches and watercolor paintings of the city, with a particular focus on the still-undeveloped rural and poorer areas of the district. While working as an illustrator for the Smithsonian's Bureau of American Ethnology in the 1890s, he was appointed as the agenc's photographer without prior photographic training. He took portrait photographs that circulated widely of thousands of Native American delegates to Washington, including notable figures such as Chief Joseph and Geronimo . These photographs have come under modern criticism for his frequent use of props and clothing, sometimes outdated or inauthentic, given to the delegates. ( Full article... ) Recently featured: Oceanic whitetip shark RoboCop Tales of Monkey Island Archive By email More featured articles About Did you know ... Yevhen Klopotenko ... that Yevhen Klopotenko (pictured) fought a "war for borscht "? ... that a street in San Francisco was named after a man who used a false identity ? ... that Alfie Templeman described the style of his studio album Radiosoul as "incohesively cohesive"? ... that Rosemary Miller won her stat's skeet shooting championship one year after learning the sport, and then won a state shooting championship in all but two years for the rest of her life? ... that the Japanese boy band Nexz was created through the program Nizi Project season 2 ? ... that the Nazi collaborator Sebastiaan de Ranitz abandoned his office following Mad Tuesday , leaving his department in turmoil? ... that Gedling Town F.C.'s nickname "The Ferrymen" was inspired by the name of a pub located next to the tea's stadium? ... that Antonio Dini was the only survivor of a three-man crew after he crashed a plane into the sea, but had no recollection of the crash due to concussion? ... that after a pigeon sculpture in Wellington went missing, members of the public created a memorial for it? Archive Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Keir Starmer The New Popular Front wins the most seats in the National Assembly in the French legislative election but does not achieve a majority . The Labour Party wins the United Kingdom general election and Keir Starmer (pictured) becomes prime minister. Hurricane Beryl , the earliest-recorded Category 5 Atlantic hurricane in a calendar year, leaves at least 15 people dead in the Caribbean , Venezuela, and the United States. In the Netherlands, a new cabinet is sworn in, with Dick Schoof serving as the prime minister . Ongoing : Israel–Hamas war timeline Russian invasion of Ukraine timeline Sudanese civil war timeline Recent deaths : Jane McAlevey Rick Cluff Martti Wallén Audrey Flack Ismail Kadare Hugh Aldons Nominate an article On this day July 10 : Independence Day in the Bahamas ( 1973 ) Martin Luther King Jr. 1645 – English Civil War : The Parliamentarians destroyed the last Royalist field army at the Battle of Langport , ultimately giving Parliament control of the west of England. 1942 – An American naval aviator discovered a downed Japanese Mitsubishi A6M Zero on Akutan Island , Alaska, which was later rebuilt and flown to devise tactics against the aircraft during World War II. 1966 – Martin Luther King Jr. (pictured) led a rally in support of the Chicago Freedom Movement , one of the most ambitious civil-rights campaigns in the northern United States. 1999 – The United States defeated China in the final match of the third FIFA Wome's World Cup , setting records in both attendance and television ratings for wome's sports. 2006 – Typhoon Ewiniar made landfall in South Korea, causing damages across the country amounting to 2.06 trillion won (US$1.4 billion). Arthur Annesley, 1st Earl of Anglesey ( b. 1614) Eva Ekeblad ( b. 1724) Bobo Brazil ( b. 1924) Calogero Vizzini ( d. 1954) More anniversaries: July 9 July 10 July 11 Archive By email List of days of the year Toda's featured picture Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – The central hub for editors, with resources, links, tasks, and announcements. Village pump – Forum for discussions about Wikipedia itself, including policies and technical issues. Site news – Sources of news about Wikipedia and the broader Wikimedia movement. Teahouse – Ask basic questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Help desk – Ask questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Reference desk – Ask research questions about encyclopedic topics. Content portals – A unique way to navigate the encyclopedia. Wikipedi's sister projects Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation , a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects : Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning tools Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English . Many other Wikipedias are available ; some of the largest are listed below. 1,000,000+ articles العربية مصرى Deutsch Español فارسی ‎ Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 250,000+ articles Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gú Български Català Čeština Dansk Esperanto Euskara עברית Հայերեն 한국어 Magyar Norsk bokmål Română Simple English Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча 50,000+ articles Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bosanski کوردی Eesti Ελληνικά Frysk Gaeilge Galego Hrvatski ქართული Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių മലയാളം Македонски မြန်မာဘာသာ Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina ไทย తెలుగు اردو Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=1225315602 "

2024 film directed by Blessy Aadujeevitham or The Goat Life is a 2024 Malayalam -language survival drama film written, directed, and co-produced by Blessy . The film is an international co-production involving companies in India and the United States. It is an adaptation of the 2008 best-selling Malayalam novel Aadujeevitham by Benyamin , which is based on the real-life story of Najeeb, a Malayali immigrant laborer, one among thousands of Indians who were forced into slavery in Saudi Arabia as goatherds on secluded farms in the deserts by the native Arabs .  The film stars Prithviraj Sukumaran , Jimmy Jean-Louis and K. R. Gokul in lead roles, with Talib Al Balushi, Rik Aby, Amala Paul and Shobha Mohan in supporting roles. The film was initially banned in the GCC countries other than UAE, subsequently the ban was lifted in all the countries except in Kuwait and Saudi Arabia.   The novel was also previously banned in the same countries. Blessy had wanted to adapt Aadujeevitham ever since he read the novel in 2008 and has cast Prithviraj as the lead. The following year, he bought the rights from Benyamin and began writing the screenplay. However, due to budget constraints which prevented substantial progress, the film went into development hell . Blessy spent years searching for a producer, finally finding one in 2015, allowing the project to gain momentum. Jimmy Jean-Louis and Steven Adams joined Blessy as co-producers. A. R. Rahman composed the fil's original score and songs. Principal photography took place in phases between March 2018 and July 2022 through six schedules in the deserts of Wadi Rum , Jordan and the Algerian desert in the Sahara with some scenes shot in Kerala , India. The crew was stranded in Jordan for 70 days from March to May 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic's restrictions. They were eventually repatriated to India via the Indian government's evacuation programme, Vande Bharat Mission . Filming concluded on 14 July 2022. The film was released worldwide on 28 March 2024 and grossed over ₹ 160 crore (US$19 million) till date.   The Goat Life is currently the 3rd highest grossing Malayalam film of all time , the 2nd highest grossing Malayalam film of 2024 , the 4th highest grossing South Indian film of the year as well as one of the highest grossing Indian films of 2024 . Plot In Saudi Arabia , Najeeb Muhammed and Hakim, two Malayali immigrants, arrive seeking a better life with visas arranged by their acquaintance Sreekumar. Stranded at the airport without knowing their employer, they are approached by a local Arab who mistakenly assumes he is their boss. Following a long journey, they are separated, with Najeeb left to work in a remote desert goat herd. Enduring harsh conditions and isolation, Najeeb witnesses the demise of a fellow goatherd , realizing the peril of his own situation. After years of suffering, he is reunited with Hakim, who introduces him to Ibrahim Khadiri, a Somalian goatherd with knowledge of escape routes. They seize an opportunity during the Khafee's daughte's wedding, fleeing into the desert. Their journey turns perilous as they struggle to find sustenance and direction, resulting in Haki's death and Najee's near demise. Eventually, Khadiri also disappears. Alone in the desert, Najeeb eventually reaches civilization with the help of a passing Arab, and finds a local Malayali restaurant owned by Kunjikka, who nurses him back to health. However, Najee's troubles are far from over. He faces imprisonment due to his own documentation issues where he meets the Khafeel, who leaves him as he is not his official sponsor and cannot take him back. Despite this setback, Najeeb eventually returns home. Cast Prithviraj Sukumaran as Najeeb Muhammed K. R. Gokul as Hakeem Amala Paul as Sainu, Najee's wife Jimmy Jean-Louis as Ibrahim Khadiri Shobha Mohan as Ummah, Najee's mother Talib Al Balushi as Kafeel Rik Aby as Jasser Nasar Karutheni as Kunjikka Robin Das as Hindiwala Baburaj Thiruvalla as Karuvatta Sreekumar Akef Najem as Rich Man in Rolls Royce Production Development In 2010, it was reported that Blessy had embarked upon the adaptation of Benyamin's 2008 Malayalam novel Aadujeevitham for a feature film. In April 2010, he told to The Hindu that he was working on the screenplay and the film would be made on a wider canvas . He also confirmed that Prithviraj Sukumaran had been cast in the lead role.  Blessy had been contemplating the adaptation of a literary work for cinema ever since he had a discourse with journalist and writer V. K. Ravi Varma Thampuran about the waning tradition of adapting literary works, which was popular in Malayalam cinema during the 1970s and 1980s.  Blessy wanted to adapt Aadujeevitham for a big-budget film ever since he read it in 2008, "I was particularly attracted to the visual images that came through while reading the book". In the novel, Haripad native Najeeb Muhammad goes missing in Saudi Arabia where he ends up as a slave to a farm owner.  In 2009, Blessy entered into a contractual agreement with Benyamin after discussing and reaching a consensus with director Lal Jose . This was because Jose had previously expressed interest in adapting the novel to Benyamin.  Blessy began screenplay writing after obtaining the rights. He noted that the film would incorporate additional material beyond what is present in the book.  Reportedly, filming was set to begin in August 2010 at the deserts of Dubai and Rajasthan ,  but that did not happen. In 2012, Benyamin said that the film was still on discussion phase and had been postponed for the time being since its production cost was found to be not viable for a Malayalam film.  Blessy had been discussing the film with Prithviraj since 2008. In 2015, recalling the fil's stagnant development to date, Prithviraj said that there were occasions when they could work out the film, albeit with some compromises, but Blessy insisted on waiting for the right producer since he was not ready to compromise his vision.  Jet Media Productio's Jimmy Jean-Louis and Alta Global Medi's Steven Adams also joined Bless's Visual Romance Image Makers as producers.  According to Prithviraj, Blessy had conceived The Goat Life as an "event film" in the lines of Life of Pi as the narrative goes from one event to the other non-linearly.  Parallel to the new announcement, also in November 2015, Blessy told to The Hindu that he was occupied with the research work of another film, which would be disclosed later, which would go on before The Goat Life .  In May 2016, Blessy confirmed that he was busy with the pre-production work of the Hindi remake of his Malayalam film Thanmathra (2005) and The Goat Life would happen only after that.  He later updated that work of both the films were progressing simultaneously and casting and scheduling would decide which film would go on first.  Meanwhile, he was already through the production of documentary film 100 Years of Chrysostom (2018) which had begun earlier in May 2015, which he would complete in two years.  In October 2016, Blessy said Aadujeevitham would begin filming in early 2017 and release in 2018.  In mid-2017, he said that they had the screenplay ready but the locations had not been decided and production would start in November 2017 and the film would take 18 months to release.  On the challenges on adapting the novel, Blessy said, in the novel, Najeeb recollects his experience through soliloquy , which is easily conveyed through literary work, but it is difficult to depict on screen. The fil's narrative is entirely different from the book. For example, in the latter half of the book, when Arbab castigates Najeeb in Arabic , readers read it in Malayalam, whereas the film has to demonstrate how much the language distresses Najeeb. Unlike the book, the film cannot afford to be vague since viewers see everything on screen and may question the logic presented. For instance, the book says that Najeeb could not find a shadow under a stick, but there is a farm that can cast a shadow, "in a literary work, you do't have to address that because readers travel the route the writer takes them on". Moreover, the film has to show Najee's physical transformation. Above everything else, the fil's visuals must surpass those imagined by the readers.  Najeeb does not understand Arabic, the makers decided to avoid subtitles for those parts to provide viewers with the same experience as Najeeb. According to Prithviraj, "the film has this huge liberty of not having a language", as only about 20 percent of the film contains dialogues.  Casting Suriya ( top ) was offered the main lead but was subsequently replaced by Prithviraj ( bottom ). Suriya was initially considered and cast for the role of Najeeb and Blessy discussed with him, but he opted out due to busy schedules and prior commitments.  Prithviraj agreed to do the film while he was at the sets of Pokkiri Raja (2010) in 2008.  Najeeb Muhammad from Benyami's novel is partially based on the real-life experiences of Najeeb.  Prithviraj said, although he is not a pious person, Najeeb has staunch focus on faith. There is a physical, psychological, and spiritual journey for the character. For three years, he interacts more with animals than humans, so he would "become" one among.  For Najee's role, Blessy wanted an actor who could dedicate at least 1 + 1 ⁄ 2 years for the film, which Prithviraj agreed.  Prithviraj had to gain and lose weight to show Najee's physical transformation on screen, he gained weight to 98 kilograms for playing the character in the starting sequences of the film with a pot belly and had to lose weight to 67 kilograms by the end of the film. Having lost 31 kilograms, Prithviraj said he followed an unhealthy diet which he would not recommend anyone to follow. He blacked-out while filming a scene. There was always a doctor on call at the set.  As of 2015, no other actor beside Prithviraj was finalised.  In 2016, Blessy said he is scouting for actors in Somalia and such places.  In 2017, a casting call was released by the makers through social media inviting applicants for a young male and female and a middle-aged female.  In February 2018, Amala Paul confirmed through social media that she is playing Sainu.   Sainu, Najee's wife, is portrayed in different phases of her life. According to Blessy, the role would tap the potential of Amala, considering the roles she had done so far.  Beside co-producing, Haitian actor Jimmy Jean-Louis played a major role as Ibrahim Khadiri.  Omani actor Talib al Balushi played the role of Najee's boss.  Rik Aby, a Sudanese actor based in the United Arab Emirates also played a role.  Filming Although the film is set in Saudi Arabia , the production team was not granted permission to shoot there, hence they had to move to other countries.  On his decision to shoot the film in 3D , Blessy said "the 3D technology will really help in elevating the overall mood. The desert wind, a small movement of the goat, the loneliness of Najeeb ... the 3D tool will help in capturing these emotions and transforming it to a different aesthetic level".  The fil's major scenes takes place in desert places. Principal photography began on 1 March 2018 with a customary pooja function.  The first schedule began in Thiruvalla , Pathanamthitta , Kerala , where flashback scenes of Najee's life before he arrived in Saudi Arabia was shot. At that time, the plan was to complete filming in 150 days spanning 18 months.  That month, filming also took place at Muthalamada railway station in Palakkad border.  The Kerala schedule was completed by April first week.  About 25 percent of the film was finished, with major portions yet to be shot.  The second schedule began in Jordan in January 2019.  Prithviraj joined the sets by the end of that month.  The crew was stranded in Wadi Rum for 70 days during the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic in Jordan The subsequent schedule, originally charted from March to early April 2020 in the Wadi Rum desert in Jordan, was delayed by the COVID-19 pandemic in Jordan . Filming finally began on 16 March. However, Omani actor Talib al Balushi and his translator were quarantined, causing him to miss the shoot after Oman evacuated its citizens. Similarly, a Sudanese actor was quarantined,  and some actors were not able to reach the location due to the cancellation of flights .  Nevertheless, the shoot continued with Prithviraj.  After Jordan initiated lockdown , Kerala chief minister directed NORKA to provide assistance through Indian embassy .  Since international flights were cancelled, the Jordanian authorities allowed the crew to continue shooting while remaining isolated.  After eight days of filming, they were forced to stop on 24 March,  but they managed to obtain permission to shoot for another 17 days.   However, the permission was revoked on 27 March after a curfew was imposed.  Blessy then requested assistance from the Kerala government , through Kerala Film Chamber of Commerce, to repatriate them.   They stayed idle for the next 32 days, during which Prithviraj further reduced his body mass .  When restrictions eased, filming resumed in April last week  and continued until 17 May.  The 58-member crew, along with other Indian citizens, were repatriated by the Government of India as part of Vande Bharat Mission and reached India on 22 May.  In their 70-day stay in the desert camp, they filmed for 25 days.  Although filming was not finished there, crucial scenes were shot, which required them to return at a later date.  Even with their original plan, they had to return for scenes featuring an American actor. About 50 percent of the film was completed with the schedule.  The next schedule began in April 2022 at Timimoun in the Sahara desert, Algeria .  As per their plan, they needed 40 days in Algeria and another 35 days in Jordan.  Algerian schedule continued to May.  In the same month, shooting relocated to Wadi Rum, Jordan.   Jordanian schedule was completed on 14 June, thus concluding the fil's international schedules.  Filming went to Perunad , Ranni , Kerala on 22 June for the final schedule.  Jail sequence was shot there on set.  Filming in its entirety was wrapped up on 14 July 2022.  K. U. Mohanan and Sunil K. S. were the cinematographers, Resul Pookutty was the sound designer , A. Sreekar Prasad was the editor, Stephy Zaviour was the costume designer, and Ranjith Ambady was the makeup artist.  In October 2022, Prithviraj told to Variety that the film is undergoing post-production and is aiming for a film festival slot in 2023.  The film is the 2nd most expensive Malayalam film ever. Music Further information: Aadujeevitham (soundtrack) The original score and songs for the film were composed by A. R. Rahman in his third film in Malayalam after Yoddha (1992) and Malayankunju (2022).    The soundtrack featured four songs and an instrumental track with lyrics by Rafeeq Ahamed , and Vijay Yesudas , Chinmayi Sripaada , Rakshita Suresh , Sana Moussa, Raja Hasan , Murtuza and Faiz Mustafa were the singers.  A grand audio launch function of the film was held on 10 March 2024 at the Adlux International Convention Centre in Angamaly , with the fil's cast and crew members along with prominent celebrities in attendance.   However, except for the promotional video song "Hope" which released on social media platforms on the same day,  the soundtrack was released a week later.  Marketing In April 2023, Deadline Hollywood released an unexpected trailer for the film. Blessy expressed dissatisfaction, clarifying that the trailer was intended for agents for screening at film festivals and business purposes, not for public release. He emphasised that the post-production work on the clips, including colour grading and music, was incomplete, with the music only composed on a keyboard . Blessy disowned it as the official theatrical release trailer.  Despite this, the production team officially released the same trailer shortly afterward.  In late-November 2023, the official social media handles for the film were revealed. In late-December, the team asked fans to design posters for their participation at a special event with Prithviraj and Blessy.  On 10 January 2024, the first look of the film was revealed by Prabhas through his social media handles, which featured Prithviraj in a bearded and gloomy appearance as Najeeb Muhammed.   Blessy and Benyamin attended the seventh edition of the Kerala Literature Festival held on 13 January, to share their insights on the adaptation from novel to film.   Two more posters were revealed on 17 and 31 January, one featuring Prithvira's gloomy look and the other that featured the actor in a younger look, reminiscing the character earlier days.   On 11 February, the team shared a video subtitled Corona Days , revealing on the turbulent production where the team stranded in Jordan during the COVID-19 pandemic.  An official website for the film was launched by Blessy and Rahman in late-February 2024.   The fil's theatrical trailer was unveiled on 9 March 2024.    The trailer was overwhelmingly well received, with media outlets such as Film Companion describing the visuals as "spellbinding",  and The Indian Express -based critic compared Prithvira's performance to that of Leonardo DiCaprio's in The Revenant (2015).  Release Theatrical During the promotion of Kaapa (2022) in December 2022, Prithviraj revealed that The Goat Life would premiere at the 2023 Cannes Film Festival if post-production work completes on time. In such a scenario, the fil's worldwide theatrical release would be in the latter half of 2023. However, if the film is not able to make it to Cannes, it will premiere at the next major film festival.  In May 2023, following the absence from Cannes, Blessy disclosed a strategy to debut the film at the Venice Film Festival , with a subsequent theatrical release in October 2023 contingent upon completing the remaining post-production works by mid-June.  In late-November 2023, it was announced that the film would be released theatrically on 10 April 2024, ahead of the Eid al-Fitr and Vishu weekend.   However, in February, the film was advanced to 28 March 2024.    The film will be distributed by Prithviraj Productions in Kerala, Hombale Films in Karnataka, Mythri Movie Makers in Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, Red Giant Movies in Tamil Nadu and AA Films in North India.  Home media The fil's satellite and digital distribution rights were acquired by Asianet and Disney+ Hotstar , respectively, which was revealed during the audio launch.  Reception Box office On the opening day of its release, the film collected approximately ₹16.7 crores, with ₹5.63 crores coming from Kerala.  Critical response On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , 86% of 7 critic' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 7.5/10.  Arjun Menon of Rediff.com rated 4/5 stars and noted, " Aadujeevitham marks a new direction for Malayalam cinema, where ambition meets resources and the right people, all in favour of stories that deserve to be told on the biggest stage of them all."  Anandu Suresh of The Indian Express gave 4/5 stars and wrote "While Blessy meticulously selected only the necessary moments for the film adaptation of The Goat Life , his script fell short throughout in building sufficient tension."

Welcome to Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit . 6,849,038 articles in English From toda's featured article DeLancey W. Gill (1859–1940) was an American drafter , landscape painter , and photographer. As a teenager, he moved in with an aunt in Washington, D.C. , after his mother and stepfather traveled west. He eventually found himself employed as an architectural draftsman for the Treasury . He created sketches and watercolor paintings of the city, with a particular focus on the still-undeveloped rural and poorer areas of the district. While working as an illustrator for the Smithsonian's Bureau of American Ethnology in the 1890s, he was appointed as the agenc's photographer without prior photographic training. He took portrait photographs that circulated widely of thousands of Native American delegates to Washington, including notable figures such as Chief Joseph and Geronimo . These photographs have come under modern criticism for his frequent use of props and clothing, sometimes outdated or inauthentic, given to the delegates. ( Full article... ) Recently featured: Oceanic whitetip shark RoboCop Tales of Monkey Island Archive By email More featured articles About Did you know ... Yevhen Klopotenko ... that Yevhen Klopotenko (pictured) fought a "war for borscht "? ... that a street in San Francisco was named after a man who used a false identity ? ... that Alfie Templeman described the style of his studio album Radiosoul as "incohesively cohesive"? ... that Rosemary Miller won her stat's skeet shooting championship one year after learning the sport, and then won a state shooting championship in all but two years for the rest of her life? ... that the Japanese boy band Nexz was created through the program Nizi Project season 2 ? ... that the Nazi collaborator Sebastiaan de Ranitz abandoned his office following Mad Tuesday , leaving his department in turmoil? ... that Gedling Town F.C.'s nickname "The Ferrymen" was inspired by the name of a pub located next to the tea's stadium? ... that Antonio Dini was the only survivor of a three-man crew after he crashed a plane into the sea, but had no recollection of the crash due to concussion? ... that after a pigeon sculpture in Wellington went missing, members of the public created a memorial for it? Archive Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Keir Starmer The New Popular Front wins the most seats in the National Assembly in the French legislative election but does not achieve a majority . The Labour Party wins the United Kingdom general election and Keir Starmer (pictured) becomes prime minister. Hurricane Beryl , the earliest-recorded Category 5 Atlantic hurricane in a calendar year, leaves at least 15 people dead in the Caribbean , Venezuela, and the United States. In the Netherlands, a new cabinet is sworn in, with Dick Schoof serving as the prime minister . Ongoing : Israel–Hamas war timeline Russian invasion of Ukraine timeline Sudanese civil war timeline Recent deaths : Jane McAlevey Rick Cluff Martti Wallén Audrey Flack Ismail Kadare Hugh Aldons Nominate an article On this day July 10 : Independence Day in the Bahamas ( 1973 ) Martin Luther King Jr. 1645 – English Civil War : The Parliamentarians destroyed the last Royalist field army at the Battle of Langport , ultimately giving Parliament control of the west of England. 1942 – An American naval aviator discovered a downed Japanese Mitsubishi A6M Zero on Akutan Island , Alaska, which was later rebuilt and flown to devise tactics against the aircraft during World War II. 1966 – Martin Luther King Jr. (pictured) led a rally in support of the Chicago Freedom Movement , one of the most ambitious civil-rights campaigns in the northern United States. 1999 – The United States defeated China in the final match of the third FIFA Wome's World Cup , setting records in both attendance and television ratings for wome's sports. 2006 – Typhoon Ewiniar made landfall in South Korea, causing damages across the country amounting to 2.06 trillion won (US$1.4 billion). Arthur Annesley, 1st Earl of Anglesey ( b. 1614) Eva Ekeblad ( b. 1724) Bobo Brazil ( b. 1924) Calogero Vizzini ( d. 1954) More anniversaries: July 9 July 10 July 11 Archive By email List of days of the year Toda's featured picture Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – The central hub for editors, with resources, links, tasks, and announcements. Village pump – Forum for discussions about Wikipedia itself, including policies and technical issues. Site news – Sources of news about Wikipedia and the broader Wikimedia movement. Teahouse – Ask basic questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Help desk – Ask questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Reference desk – Ask research questions about encyclopedic topics. Content portals – A unique way to navigate the encyclopedia. Wikipedi's sister projects Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation , a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects : Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning tools Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English . Many other Wikipedias are available ; some of the largest are listed below. 1,000,000+ articles العربية مصرى Deutsch Español فارسی ‎ Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 250,000+ articles Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gú Български Català Čeština Dansk Esperanto Euskara עברית Հայերեն 한국어 Magyar Norsk bokmål Română Simple English Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча 50,000+ articles Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bosanski کوردی Eesti Ελληνικά Frysk Gaeilge Galego Hrvatski ქართული Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių മലയാളം Македонски မြန်မာဘာသာ Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina ไทย తెలుగు اردو Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=1225315602 "

Welcome to Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit . 6,849,038 articles in English From toda's featured article DeLancey W. Gill (1859–1940) was an American drafter , landscape painter , and photographer. As a teenager, he moved in with an aunt in Washington, D.C. , after his mother and stepfather traveled west. He eventually found himself employed as an architectural draftsman for the Treasury . He created sketches and watercolor paintings of the city, with a particular focus on the still-undeveloped rural and poorer areas of the district. While working as an illustrator for the Smithsonian's Bureau of American Ethnology in the 1890s, he was appointed as the agenc's photographer without prior photographic training. He took portrait photographs that circulated widely of thousands of Native American delegates to Washington, including notable figures such as Chief Joseph and Geronimo . These photographs have come under modern criticism for his frequent use of props and clothing, sometimes outdated or inauthentic, given to the delegates. ( Full article... ) Recently featured: Oceanic whitetip shark RoboCop Tales of Monkey Island Archive By email More featured articles About Did you know ... Yevhen Klopotenko ... that Yevhen Klopotenko (pictured) fought a "war for borscht "? ... that a street in San Francisco was named after a man who used a false identity ? ... that Alfie Templeman described the style of his studio album Radiosoul as "incohesively cohesive"? ... that Rosemary Miller won her stat's skeet shooting championship one year after learning the sport, and then won a state shooting championship in all but two years for the rest of her life? ... that the Japanese boy band Nexz was created through the program Nizi Project season 2 ? ... that the Nazi collaborator Sebastiaan de Ranitz abandoned his office following Mad Tuesday , leaving his department in turmoil? ... that Gedling Town F.C.'s nickname "The Ferrymen" was inspired by the name of a pub located next to the tea's stadium? ... that Antonio Dini was the only survivor of a three-man crew after he crashed a plane into the sea, but had no recollection of the crash due to concussion? ... that after a pigeon sculpture in Wellington went missing, members of the public created a memorial for it? Archive Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Keir Starmer The New Popular Front wins the most seats in the National Assembly in the French legislative election but does not achieve a majority . The Labour Party wins the United Kingdom general election and Keir Starmer (pictured) becomes prime minister. Hurricane Beryl , the earliest-recorded Category 5 Atlantic hurricane in a calendar year, leaves at least 15 people dead in the Caribbean , Venezuela, and the United States. In the Netherlands, a new cabinet is sworn in, with Dick Schoof serving as the prime minister . Ongoing : Israel–Hamas war timeline Russian invasion of Ukraine timeline Sudanese civil war timeline Recent deaths : Jane McAlevey Rick Cluff Martti Wallén Audrey Flack Ismail Kadare Hugh Aldons Nominate an article On this day July 10 : Independence Day in the Bahamas ( 1973 ) Martin Luther King Jr. 1645 – English Civil War : The Parliamentarians destroyed the last Royalist field army at the Battle of Langport , ultimately giving Parliament control of the west of England. 1942 – An American naval aviator discovered a downed Japanese Mitsubishi A6M Zero on Akutan Island , Alaska, which was later rebuilt and flown to devise tactics against the aircraft during World War II. 1966 – Martin Luther King Jr. (pictured) led a rally in support of the Chicago Freedom Movement , one of the most ambitious civil-rights campaigns in the northern United States. 1999 – The United States defeated China in the final match of the third FIFA Wome's World Cup , setting records in both attendance and television ratings for wome's sports. 2006 – Typhoon Ewiniar made landfall in South Korea, causing damages across the country amounting to 2.06 trillion won (US$1.4 billion). Arthur Annesley, 1st Earl of Anglesey ( b. 1614) Eva Ekeblad ( b. 1724) Bobo Brazil ( b. 1924) Calogero Vizzini ( d. 1954) More anniversaries: July 9 July 10 July 11 Archive By email List of days of the year Toda's featured picture Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – The central hub for editors, with resources, links, tasks, and announcements. Village pump – Forum for discussions about Wikipedia itself, including policies and technical issues. Site news – Sources of news about Wikipedia and the broader Wikimedia movement. Teahouse – Ask basic questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Help desk – Ask questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Reference desk – Ask research questions about encyclopedic topics. Content portals – A unique way to navigate the encyclopedia. Wikipedi's sister projects Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation , a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects : Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning tools Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English . Many other Wikipedias are available ; some of the largest are listed below. 1,000,000+ articles العربية مصرى Deutsch Español فارسی ‎ Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 250,000+ articles Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gú Български Català Čeština Dansk Esperanto Euskara עברית Հայերեն 한국어 Magyar Norsk bokmål Română Simple English Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча 50,000+ articles Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bosanski کوردی Eesti Ελληνικά Frysk Gaeilge Galego Hrvatski ქართული Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių മലയാളം Македонски မြန်မာဘာသာ Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina ไทย తెలుగు اردو Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=1225315602 "

2024 Indian Malayalam-language film Aavesham ( transl. Excitement ) is a 2024 Indian Malayalam -language action comedy film directed by Jithu Madhavan and produced by Nazriya Nazim and Anwar Rasheed under Fahadh Faasil and Friends and Anwar Rasheed Entertainments . It stars Fahadh Faasil in the lead role, alongside Hipzster, Mithun Jai Shankar, Roshan Shanavas and Sajin Gopu , while Midhutty and Mansoor Ali Khan appear in supporting roles. The music was composed by Sushin Shyam , while the cinematography and editing were handled by Sameer Thahir and Vivek Harshan . Aavesham was released on 11 April 2024 to critical acclaim from critics with praise for its direction, performances (especially Fahadh Faasil and Sajin Gopu), action sequences, cinematography, music and technical aspects. The film became a blockbuster , grossing over ₹156 crores against a budget of ₹30 crores.  It is currently the fourth highest grossing Malayalam film of all time , third highest-grossing Malayalam film of 2024 , fifth highest-grossing South Indian film of 2024 as well as one of the highest grossing Indian films of 2024 . Plot [ edit ] Aju, Bibi and Shanthan arrive in Bangalore , Karnataka from Kerala to pursue a degree in aeronautical engineering at Vaana Veekshan College, choosing the BK Hostel (run by the college clerk BK) for its perceived freedom compared to their college accommodation. Initially, they enjoy their time there until a confrontation with Kutty, a senior student, escalates, bruising his ego. In retaliation, Kutty and his gang forcefully take the trio to his place and brutally thrash them, only to offer friendship afterward. Feeling humiliated, Aju seeks revenge and leads his friends to multiple bars in search of gangsters, eventually befriending Ranga, a prominent, eccentric and kind-hearted Malayali-Kannadiga gangster who dresses in all-white . One day after the trio gets drunk, Ranga takes them in their jeep to drop them off at their hostel, but the hostel warden warns them not to arrive late as there are rules in the hostel. So Ranga takes them to his old house to accommodate them as a note of goodwill. Disillusioned by Rang's lack of action, they realize his gang merely praises him while engaging in minor violence. When Bibi confronts Ranga about the incident with Kutty, Ranga unleashes his fury during the college Holi celebration, beating up Kutty and his gang in front of everyone. They face expulsion after being unable to pass exams and because of their association with Ranga, but are given a second chance with assurances of passing all future exams. After their initial victory against Kutty, their association with Ranga begins to consume their lives, affecting their studies. They are unable to focus on their studies as Ranga keeps involving them in his high-octane lifestyle of chases, fights and parties. After a night of one such revelry, the three of them discover a grim truth in the house related to Rang's past. After this discovery, the trio meets Ranga and tries to express their desire to sever ties with him, by trying to reveal that they only befriended him for revenge but hold back when they see Ranga threaten to kill two of his gang members trying to leave the gang. The tri's troubles escalate when they are kidnapped by Reddy, Rang's former boss. Reddy accuses Ranga of stealing his brand and seeks their help to eliminate him by asking them to give him (Reddy) a call whenever they next encounter Ranga. Fleeing from Redd's threats they go back to their house. Unable to handle staying in the house, the trio decides to switch off their phones and leave for a different hostel in Tumkur. They manage to study there, meanwhile Ranga keeps frantically searching for the boys. The boys finally decide to confront Ranga and make up a plan to call Reddy when he is alone. They eventually pick up Rang's call and ask him to meet face-to-face in his accommodation he set up for them, in order to sever all ties with him and his gang. The boys proceed to open up to Ranga as to the fact that they only befriended him to keep away Kuttan and his gang, and proceeded to tell him just how negatively he had impacted their life after that chance encounter. A now-agitated Ranga calls his gang to the house. The anxious boys, now fearing for their life, try concocting a plan on the spot, and finally, they call Reddy and his gang (as he had offered them a means to betray Ranga after kidnapping them earlier), in order to get rid of Rang's presence in their life. Reddy and his goons arrive before Rang's gang, and Reddy thanks the boys for their timely tip-off of Rang's whereabouts and proclaims that h'll deal with the rest. Ranga thus realises that the boys had double-crossed him. Distraught at their betrayal, Ranga broke his vow of not getting personally involved in fights, and faces Redd's gang alone in hand-to-hand combat, and emerges victorious. Further incensed by their betrayal, he chases them across the house (with his now-arrived goons blocking the exits and windows of the house), and reveals that he kept the boys with him as no one had gotten close to him in his life unless they needed something from him. Realizing their mistake, they apologize to Ranga. Ranga begrudgingly lets them go (after going through an emotional turmoil fuelled further by a call from Bib's mother where she, in a concerning manner, asks about Ranga and Bib's wellbeing), and warns them to not fail in a single exam. Aju and Bibi are unable to clear their exams by failing in one subject, while Shanthan passes them. They encounter Ranga, now clad in all-black attire as new look, outside the college. Ranga humorously punishes Aju and Bibi for their inability to pass all the exams. Cast [ edit ] Fahadh Faasil as Ranjith "Ranga" Gangadharan Mithun Jai Shankar as Bibin "Bibi" Prakash Hipzster as Ajas "Aju" Bhasi Roshan Shahnavaz as Shanthakumaran "Shanthan" Sajin Gopu as Ambaan Midhutty as Kutty "Kuttettan" Mansoor Ali Khan as Reddy Neeraja Rajendran as Bib's mother Pramod Veliyanad as Rang's cousin Sreejith Nair as Bala Krishnan Krishna Kumar as Nanjappa Freestyle Krishna as Bruce-lee Himanshu as Jacky Thankam Mohan as Rang's mother Pooja Mohanraj as Beauty Preeti Bhardwaj as Sweety Ashish Vidyarthi as Executive Director of Engineering College ( cameo appearance ) Production [ edit ] Development [ edit ] In March 2023, Jithu Madhavan announced his second film starring Fahadh Faasil , who also co-produced the film through his production company Fahadh Faasil and Friends with Anwar Rasheed Entertainments .   The fil's title Aavesham was announced in May 2023. Madhavan wrote the script during early-December 2022 and completed within February 2023 during the period when his debut film Romancham (2022) was delayed from October 2022 to February 2023.  Though it was reported that the film is a spin-off of Romancham , Madhavan later clarified that Aavesham is a standalone film and has no connections with Romancham .  The technical crew consisted of Sushin Shyam , Sameer Thahir , Vivek Harshan and Ashwini Kale as music composer, cinematographer, editor and production designer respectively.  Casting [ edit ] Fahadh plays the role of Ranga, a Bangalore -based gangster;  He was featured in a thick handlebar moustache and an all-white attire in a leaked picture from the fil's production in May 2023.  Fahadh attributed that he had not explored such characters before, which led to him agreeing to the story, adding that "Jithu  gave me a very clear understanding of who Ranga would be. However, we finalised the look and attire after we started filming for the movie."  Compared to his previous films, Fahad's character would be loud in the film and would speak in a mixture of Malayalam and Kannada , resembling how gangsters from the city would speak.  Sajin Gopu , who previously acted in Romancham was assigned an important role in the film, with Mansoor Ali Khan and Ashish Vidyarthi in supporting roles.  The film also featured newcomers including Pranav Raj - Hipzster, Mithun Jai Shankar, Roshan Shanavas and Midhutty.  Filming [ edit ] Principal photography commenced in Bangalore on the same date as the announcement.  The film was shot extensively in Bangalore and its outskirts and production completed in November 2023.  Costumes [ edit ] Mashar Hamsa served as the fil's costume designer . Throughout the film, Faha's character Ranga appears in an all-white attire wearing gold chains, except for the climactic portions where Fahadh would appear in an all-black attire.  Rang's younger version sports a trimmed deep fade hairstyle and wears a windbreaker , which resembles Dali Benssalah's look from the music video of the French musical duo The Blaze's single "Territory" (2017) and also British boxer Naseem Hamed .  Music [ edit ] The fil's soundtrack was composed by Sushin Shyam with lyrics written by Vinayak Sasikumar and featured nine songs performed by independent artists.  The soundtrack was released by Think Music on 19 April 2024 after being preceded by four singles: "Jaada", "Galatta", "Illuminati" and "Mathapithakkale".  Release [ edit ] Theatrical [ edit ] Aavesham was theatrically released on 11 April 2024, during the Eid al-Fitr and Vishu weekend.   It was earlier scheduled for theatrical release during the Onam (25 August 2023) and Christmas weekends (22 December 2023),  but Fahadh in July 2023 announced that the film will be released during the first quarter of 2024.  Its current release date was announced in December.  The film will be distributed by A&A Release across India, while Phars Film acquiring the overseas theatrical rights.  Aavesham was listed as one of the "most anticipated Malayalam films of 2024" by several publications and industry sources.  In comparison with Varshangalkku Shesham and Jai Ganesh which released on the same weekend, the film garnered ₹ 78 lakh (US$93,000) from the ticket pre-sales which opened three days prior to its release.  More than 50,000 admissions from Kerala theatres were recorded from 567 tracked shows.  The film, along with several other Malayalam films, were not released at PVR INOX multiplex chains across India in response to a dispute between the Film Employees Federation of Kerala and the authorities of PVR INOX management over Virtual Print Fee , as well as the federatio's plans on distributing films through their newly established content providing service over Qube Cinema Technologies ,the primary content provider for PVR INOX theatres.   However, the ban was lifted on 13 April and the film was released in the multiplex chains the following day.  Prior to the fil's release, the film garnered U/A certificate from the Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) with the duration of the final edit being 157 minutes.  A scene from the fil's second half was removed prior to the theatrical showcasing in Kuwait , owing to the recommendation of the censor board.  Home media [ edit ] The fil's post-theatrical digital streaming rights were acquired by Amazon Prime Video ,  and was premiered on 9 May 2024.  Hindi version of the film was released on Disney+ Hotstar on 20 June 2024.  Marketing [ edit ] The fil's theatrical teaser trailer was unveiled on 25 January 2024.   A promotional event was held at the Union Christian College, Aluva on 26 March 2024 with the presence of Fahadh, Madhavan and Shyam, along with the principal cast.   Reception [ edit ] Aavesham received positive reviews from critics with praise for its performances (especially Fahadh Faasil and Sajin Gopu), script, direction, action sequences, humor, music and technical aspects.   Critical response [ edit ] Goutham S of Pinkvilla gave 4/5 stars and wrote " Aavesham is ideally one of those movies that you could enjoy in theaters if you love a comedy film with a wild ride happening. The show is definitely run by Fahadh Faasil who is all set to entertain you with a great array of actors supporting him."  Anandu Suresh of The Indian Express gave 3.5/5 stars and wrote "Jithu Madhava's gangster comedy is arguably Fahadh Faasi's first all-encompassing masala film and the actor unabashedly uses it to silence all the criticisms against him that he ca't handle mass characters."  Anna Mathews of The Times of India gave 3.5/5 stars and wrote "Apart from scripting superb side characters, Jithu Madhavan has crafted the comic timing of his dialogues well."  Janani K of India Today gave 3.5/5 stars and wrote "Aavesham is truly an enjoyable affair with brilliantly choreographed action sequences and comedy sequences. If yo're a fan of Fahadh Faasil, then Aavesham will prove why you became his fan in the first place."  Nirmal Jovial of The Week gave 3.5/5 stars and wrote "The film maintains a celebratory mood from beginning till end."  Arjun Menon of Rediff rated 3/5 stars and applauded "Aavesham is smooth in its storytelling and leaves a chilling aftertaste, thanks to its one-of-a-kind anti-hero."  Swathi P Ajith of Onmanorama termed it as "the perfect choice if yo're seeking laughter and entertainment in equal measure."  S. R. Praveen of The Hindu wrote " Romancham director Jithu Madhavan returns with his sophomore effort, that is held afloat by Fahadh Faasil running riot in one of his most colourful characters."  Box office [ edit ] On the opening day of its release, the film grossed ₹3.9 crores worldwide, gaining the first spot between concurrent releases Varshangalku Shesham and Jai Ganesh .  The fil's ticket sales were further boosted by its positive word of mouth,  which helped it to earn a total of ₹18.75 crores domestically on Vishu holiday.  As of 23 April 2024, the film has grossed ₹100 crore worldwide.

Indian film director Anwar Rasheed is an Indian film director and producer who works in Malayalam films . He made his debut in 2005 with Rajamanikyam . He continued to do successful action-comedy films, such as Chotta Mumbai (2007) and Annan Thambi (2008). His directorial drama Ustad Hotel (2012) won the National Film Award for Best Popular Film Providing Wholesome Entertainment . He has produced critically and commercially successful films like Bangalore Days (2014), Premam (2015) and Parava (2017) under the banner Anwar Rasheed Entertainments. Career [ edit ] Rasheed started his career by assisting director Ranjith in his films. After Ranjith withdrew his decision in directing the film Rajamanikyam , Rasheed was called on to do the same project. Rasheed debuted as a director in 2005 with Rajamanikyam in which Mammootty played the lead role. In 2007, he directed the action-comedy Chotta Mumbai starring Mohanlal in the lead role. It was followed by the action-comedy Annan Thambi (2008), the drama Bridge in Kerala Cafe (2009) and Ustad Hotel (2012), the latter won the National Film Award for Best Popular Film Providing Wholesome Entertainment . In 2013, Anwar directed the segment Aami in the anthology film 5 Sundarikal . His latest movie as a director is Trance , starring Fahadh Faasil . Anwar also produced the movie under his banner'Anwar Rasheed Entertainment'. Filmography [ edit ] As director [ edit ] As producer [ edit ] As actor [ edit ] Ee Parakkum Thalika (2001)

Indian actor and producer (born 1982) Fahadh Fazil (born 8 August 1982), professionally known as Fahadh Faasil , is an Indian actor and producer who predominantly works in Malayalam and Tamil films. He is widely regarded as one of the greatest Indian  actors of his generation, he has consistently delivered remarkable performances throughout his career, and noted for his diverse portrayals, Fahadh is among the highest-paid Malayalam actors. He is one of the most popular Malayalam actors of all times.   Fahadh is a recipient of several accolades including a National Film Award , four Kerala State Film Awards and three Filmfare Awards South .  Fahadh is the son of filmmaker Fazil . Fahadh began his film career at the age of 20 by starring in the leading role in his father Fazil's 2002 romantic film Kaiyethum Doorath , which was a critical and commercial failure. After a gap of 7 years, Fahadh made his comeback with the anthology film Kerala Cafe (2009), in the short film Mrityunjayam . He attained public attention for his role as Arjun in the thriller film Chaappa Kurishu (2011). Fahadh won his first Kerala State Film Award , the Best Supporting Actor Award for his performance in Chaappa Kurishu along with his performance in Akam . He achieved critical acclaim and recognition for his roles as Cyril in 22 Female Kottayam (2012) and Dr. Arun Kumar in Diamond Necklace (2012). He won his first Filmfare Award for Best Actor for his role in 22 Female Kottayam .  Fahadh achieved further critical and commercial success for his films in 2013, including his performances in the romantic-drama film Annayum Rasoolum , the black-comedy satire film Amen , the road movie North 24 Kaatham , the drama film Artist , and the romantic-comedy Oru Indian Pranayakadha . He won the Kerala State Film Award for Best Actor for his performances as Michael in Artist and Harikrishnan in North 24 Kaatham . He also won his second Filmfare Award for Best Actor for his role in North 24 Kaatham .  He followed it up by starring as Shivadas in the coming-of-age drama film Bangalore Days (2014), which ranks among the highest-grossing Malayalam films . He produced and starred as Aloshy in the 2014 period film Iyobinte Pusthakam under his production company, Fahadh Faasil and Friends Pvt Ltd. Fahadh also has a Digital Entertainment Company/Movie Production House named Bhavana Studios partnered with Dileesh Pothan and Syam Pushkaran . Fahadh had roles as Mahesh Bhavana in Maheshinte Prathikaaram (2016), Indian diplomat Manoj Abraham in Take Off (2017), and Prasad in Thondimuthalum Driksakshiyum (2017), with Maheshinte Prathikaaram and Thondimuthalum Driksakshiyum winning the Best Feature Film in Malayalam Award at the 64th and 65th National Film Awards .  He won the National Film Award for Best Supporting Actor for his performance in Thondimuthalum Driksakshiyum (2017) and his third Filmfare Award for Best Actor – Malayalam . In 2018, he acted as Prakashan in the film Njan Prakashan which ranks among highest-grossing Malayalam films and as Aby in the film Varathan . In 2021, he portrayed the titular anti-hero in the crime drama Joji which received acclaim. Fahadh later received nationwide acclaim for his performance in the political thriller Malik (2021), the action thriller Vikram (2022) and the action comedy Aavesham (2024).  Fahadh is a celebrity endorser for several brands and products and is a philanthropist. Fahadh is married to actress Nazriya Nazim . Early life and background [ edit ] Fahadh Faasil was born as Abdul Hameed Mohammed Fahadh Fazil, on 8 August 1982,   in Alappuzha , Kerala , to film director Fazil and his wife, Rozina.  He has two sisters, Ahameda and Fatima, and a brother, Farhaan , who is also an actor.   Fahadh completed his schooling from SDV Central School Alappuzha , Lawrence School Ooty and Choice School Tripunithura . He went on to pursue his Bachelo's from SD College , Alleppey and Masters in philosophy from University of Miami in the United States.   Career [ edit ] Debut, comeback and breakthrough (2002–2012) [ edit ] Fahadh made his film debut with his fathe's Kaiyethum Doorath (2002) under the stage name of Shaanu. The film was a failure at the box office.   Regarding his performance, a critic wrote that "Shaanu oozes charm and suits the character of Sachin but he has to work hard on his dancing".  Fahadh later defended his father, stating "do't blame my father for my failure because it was my mistake and I came into acting without any preparation of my own".  After his debut, he moved to the United States for five years, where he pursued his studies,  before returning in 2009 to act in the film Kerala Cafe (2009), conceived by director Ranjith .  At Ranjit's behest, director Uday Ananthan cast Fahad in his Mrityunjayam , one of the 10 shorts in the film.  He played the role of a journalist in the Mrityunjayam , a ghost film set on a spooky old'Man'. He was chosen to co-star in B. Unnikrishnan's Pramani . He then appeared as a business head in the thriller Cocktail (2010). His next film, Tournament , was also a thriller. He appeared in Sameer Thahir's directorial debut Chaappa Kurishu (2011), a thriller in which he played the head of a construction business. "Arjun – my character in Chappa Kurishu is not a role that an actor gets often. I am very lucky and very fortunate," Fahad said. He shot a long kissing scene with his co-star Remya Nambeesan in the film – supposedly the first-ever in Malayalam cinema – which upon release was termed controversial.  In Fahad's next film, Akam (2011), a contemporary adaptation of Malayattoor Ramakrishnan's psycho-thriller novel Yakshi , he played Srinivas , a young architect who starts suspecting that his beautiful wife is a yakshi . "Playing Srinivas was like re-inventing myself. We had a workshop before shooting began and I had ample opportunity to explore the nuances of the character. In the process of re-inventing Srinivas, I reinvented myself," said Fahadh.  The film premiered at the Dubai International Film Festival . He won the Kerala State Film Award for Second Best Actor in 2012 for his performance in Chappa Kurishu and Akam.  In 2012, he played a negative character in 22 Female Kottayam , a rape and revenge film, which was critically acclaimed.  In his next film, Lal Jose's Diamond Necklace (2012), he played the role of an oncologist working in Dubai and the film centred on the docto's relationship with three different women.  Both the films 22 Female Kottayam and Diamond Necklace were a commercial and critical success and ran over 100 days in theatres.  In June 2012, a case was registered against Fahadh by the Kochi Town Central Police for violation of the rule against public display of images of smoking. A poster of Diamond Necklace that showed him smoking a cigarette had been on display before the Kavitha Theatre in Kochi since the film was released.  In his next film, Lijin Jos's Friday (2012) he played an auto rickshaw driver.  The same year, he appeared in The Day of Judgement , one of the three featurettes from the portmanteau film D Company .  Established actor and critical acclaim (2013–2017) [ edit ] In the year 2013, he was in cinematographer Rajeev Ravi's directorial debut Annayum Rasoolum , Lijo Jose Pellissery's Amen , V. K. Prakash's Natholi Oru Cheriya Meenalla , Salam Bapp's directorial debut Red Wine , debutant Anil Radhakrishnan Menon's North 24 Kaatham and Sathyan Anthikad's Oru Indian Pranayakatha . He won Kerala State Film Award for Best Actor for his performance in North 24 Kaatham .  Amen was both commercial and critical success and was named as one of the best films of the year by Khaleej Times  while Annayum Rasoolum managed to be commercial success.   Oru Indian Prayankatha was a sleeper hit . In 2014, he acted in the big budget movie Iyobinte Pusthakam , which he himself produced. Fahadh also played a major role in the multi-starrer blockbuster movie Bangalore Days . It is considered one of the best Malayalam movies made during the New gen movement.  In 2015 he starred in Ayal Njanalla , Haram , Mariyam Mukku , none of which performed well at the box office. In 2016, his first release, Monsoon Mangoes , failed at the box office, even though his performance was highly praised and the movie gathered mixed critic responses.    His next release was on 5 February 2016 Maheshinte Prathikaaram which was a commercial success and a major breakthrough in his career.  In 2017, he acted in four films out of which Take Off and Thondimuthalum Driksakshiyum were commercial and critical success.  Thondimuthalum Driksakshiyum won three awards at the 65th National Film Awards . Besides Best Malayalam Film and Best Screenplay for the film, Fahadh won in the Best Supporting Actor category.  Fahadh made his debut in Tamil cinema , through the film Velaikkaran starring Sivakarthikeyan , opposite whom he plays the antagonist.  Experimentation of genres and stardom (2018–present) [ edit ] Fahadh got back to back critical and box office successes with Varathan (2018), Njan Prakashan (2018) and Kumbalangi Nights (2019), which collectively grossed more than ₹ 100 crore at the box office.  He played the character Shammi in Kumbalangi Nights , which developed a cult following with many of his dialogues becoming popular.  Njan Prakashan collected ₹52 crore from Worldwide box office, which is one of the highest grossing Malayalam film till date.  His last film in 2019 was the psychological thriller Athiran , where he played the role of a psychiatrist. It largely received positive reviews and performed well at box office.  His next Tamil film was Super Deluxe , in which he co-starred alongside Vijay Sethupathi , Samantha Ruth Prabhu and Ramya Krishnan .  Fahadh in 2018 His first release in 2020, Trance received wide acclaim from critics. The Indian Express praised Fahad's performance and said: "Fahadh steals the limelight by portraying a character that is hysteric and disturbing at the same time".  After Trance , Fahadh turned to do films released through OTT platforms amid the COVID-19 pandemic in India . Among this, the first movie was C U Soon (2020), which is Indi's first computer screen film . It generally received positive reviews from critics.  His first release in 2021 was Irul , a mystery thriller released on streaming platform Netflix on 2 April 2021. Despite the film received mixed reviews due to its complex story, Fahadh received critical acclaim for portraying a mysterious character.  Five days after the release of Irul came out Joji , which is a crime drama directed by Dileesh Pothan. The movie in which he played the titular anti-hero received well acclaim from critics. His performance in it is also considered one of his career best by some critics and fans.   Firstpost wrote: "The story is unequivocally centred around Fahad's character, and the actor plays a deceptively calm layabout simmering with rage with the sort of unassuming brilliance that is now his trademark".  Nearly a week after the release of Joji , reports came out that the Film Exhibitors United Organisation of Kerala (FEUOK) has warned Fahadh against acting in movies made for streaming through OTT platforms.  It was also reported that FEUOK has also threatened that his next big movies in 2021 like Malik will face difficulties for screening on the big screen if he continues to cooperate with OTT platforms as a consequence.  But the organisation later claimed that all such news were baseless and they no connection with them.  Fahad's next release in 2021 was Mahesh Narayanan's big budget political thriller Malik . The film which was supposed to release in 2020 was also Fahad's most expensive Malayalam film to date. Besides Fahadh, the film stars Nimisha Sajayan, Vinay Forrt, Dileesh Pothan and Joju George in pivotal roles.  Malik received nationwide acclaim from critics  and large positive feedback from fans, with many critics describing Fahad's performance in the film as arguably his career best.     Fahadh made his debut in Telugu cinema with Pushpa: The Rise (2021) as the antagonist of the film.  In 2022, he was seen along with Kamal Haasan in the film Vikram as Amar, a black-ops agent. His film, Dhoomam , was a collaboration with Hombale Films , marking their maiden venture in Malayalam. In 2023, Fahadh portrayed Rathnavelu, a villain, in the film Maamannan along with Vadivelu . His performance garnered widespread acclaim. His portrayal and the fil's success even sparked a trend in meme culture.  Filmography [ edit ] Main article: Fahadh Faasil filmography Personal life [ edit ] On 20 January 2014, he got engaged to Malayalam film actress Nazriya Nazim  whom he married on 21 August 2014 at Trivandrum .   The pair got to know each other more on the sets of Anjali Menon's Bangalore Days (2014), in which they played the roles of husband and wife. Fahadh revealed that their parents had been pivotal in arranging the marriage.   In 2024, he said he has attention deficit hyperactivity disorder .  Acting style and media image [ edit ] Fahadh is considered among the most popular and highest-paid actors of Malayalam cinema , according to various media reports.   Fahadh is noted for playing a variety of roles in a variety of genres. Princy Alexander of Onmanorama called him a "force to reckon with".  Writing for The News Minute , Fahir Maithutty called him a front-runner of the New Generation Wave and said, "Fahadh possesses traits that set him apart as an actor — his command over dialects and his ability to transform to any character."  Anandu Suresh of The Indian Express talked about his career comeback and noted, "The new Fahadh displayed remarkable growth and maturity. His second innings made him one of contemporary Indian cinema’s finest actors."  Neelima Menon of HuffPost stated, "Most of his notable films are character-driven and many of his characters have been flawed, vulnerable heroes. He is a product of new-age Malayalam cinema, where superstardom has begun to wane, and alpha male heroes have been exiled.  Film critic Aparna Prashanthi opined: "He is an actor in the purest sense. He isn’t addicted to stardom nor is he particular about drawing all the attention to himself in a film. He just wants to be part of good cinema."  Rediff.com named Fahad the "Best Malayalam Actor" of 2012 and 2013.   Fahadh is a celebrity endorser for brands and products such as Titan , Milma , Jos Alukkas , Adithi Aatta, UAE Exchange , Estilocus and Camerry Icecreams.   In the Kochi Times Most Desirable Men list, Fahadh was placed in 5th 2017, 2nd in 2018, 7th in 2019 and 8th in 2020.     His performance in Maheshinte Prathikaram and Thondimuthalum Driksakshiyum is regarded as one of the "100 Greatest Performances of the Decade" by Film Companion .  In 2019 and 2022, the Indian edition of GQ featured Fahadh among the natio's most influential young people and credited him for "choosing scripts with an edge, and pouring himself into his parts with conviction".   Awards and nominations [ edit ]

Welcome to Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit . 6,849,038 articles in English From toda's featured article DeLancey W. Gill (1859–1940) was an American drafter , landscape painter , and photographer. As a teenager, he moved in with an aunt in Washington, D.C. , after his mother and stepfather traveled west. He eventually found himself employed as an architectural draftsman for the Treasury . He created sketches and watercolor paintings of the city, with a particular focus on the still-undeveloped rural and poorer areas of the district. While working as an illustrator for the Smithsonian's Bureau of American Ethnology in the 1890s, he was appointed as the agenc's photographer without prior photographic training. He took portrait photographs that circulated widely of thousands of Native American delegates to Washington, including notable figures such as Chief Joseph and Geronimo . These photographs have come under modern criticism for his frequent use of props and clothing, sometimes outdated or inauthentic, given to the delegates. ( Full article... ) Recently featured: Oceanic whitetip shark RoboCop Tales of Monkey Island Archive By email More featured articles About Did you know ... Yevhen Klopotenko ... that Yevhen Klopotenko (pictured) fought a "war for borscht "? ... that a street in San Francisco was named after a man who used a false identity ? ... that Alfie Templeman described the style of his studio album Radiosoul as "incohesively cohesive"? ... that Rosemary Miller won her stat's skeet shooting championship one year after learning the sport, and then won a state shooting championship in all but two years for the rest of her life? ... that the Japanese boy band Nexz was created through the program Nizi Project season 2 ? ... that the Nazi collaborator Sebastiaan de Ranitz abandoned his office following Mad Tuesday , leaving his department in turmoil? ... that Gedling Town F.C.'s nickname "The Ferrymen" was inspired by the name of a pub located next to the tea's stadium? ... that Antonio Dini was the only survivor of a three-man crew after he crashed a plane into the sea, but had no recollection of the crash due to concussion? ... that after a pigeon sculpture in Wellington went missing, members of the public created a memorial for it? Archive Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Keir Starmer The New Popular Front wins the most seats in the National Assembly in the French legislative election but does not achieve a majority . The Labour Party wins the United Kingdom general election and Keir Starmer (pictured) becomes prime minister. Hurricane Beryl , the earliest-recorded Category 5 Atlantic hurricane in a calendar year, leaves at least 15 people dead in the Caribbean , Venezuela, and the United States. In the Netherlands, a new cabinet is sworn in, with Dick Schoof serving as the prime minister . Ongoing : Israel–Hamas war timeline Russian invasion of Ukraine timeline Sudanese civil war timeline Recent deaths : Jane McAlevey Rick Cluff Martti Wallén Audrey Flack Ismail Kadare Hugh Aldons Nominate an article On this day July 10 : Independence Day in the Bahamas ( 1973 ) Martin Luther King Jr. 1645 – English Civil War : The Parliamentarians destroyed the last Royalist field army at the Battle of Langport , ultimately giving Parliament control of the west of England. 1942 – An American naval aviator discovered a downed Japanese Mitsubishi A6M Zero on Akutan Island , Alaska, which was later rebuilt and flown to devise tactics against the aircraft during World War II. 1966 – Martin Luther King Jr. (pictured) led a rally in support of the Chicago Freedom Movement , one of the most ambitious civil-rights campaigns in the northern United States. 1999 – The United States defeated China in the final match of the third FIFA Wome's World Cup , setting records in both attendance and television ratings for wome's sports. 2006 – Typhoon Ewiniar made landfall in South Korea, causing damages across the country amounting to 2.06 trillion won (US$1.4 billion). Arthur Annesley, 1st Earl of Anglesey ( b. 1614) Eva Ekeblad ( b. 1724) Bobo Brazil ( b. 1924) Calogero Vizzini ( d. 1954) More anniversaries: July 9 July 10 July 11 Archive By email List of days of the year Toda's featured picture Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – The central hub for editors, with resources, links, tasks, and announcements. Village pump – Forum for discussions about Wikipedia itself, including policies and technical issues. Site news – Sources of news about Wikipedia and the broader Wikimedia movement. Teahouse – Ask basic questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Help desk – Ask questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Reference desk – Ask research questions about encyclopedic topics. Content portals – A unique way to navigate the encyclopedia. Wikipedi's sister projects Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation , a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects : Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning tools Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English . Many other Wikipedias are available ; some of the largest are listed below. 1,000,000+ articles العربية مصرى Deutsch Español فارسی ‎ Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 250,000+ articles Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gú Български Català Čeština Dansk Esperanto Euskara עברית Հայերեն 한국어 Magyar Norsk bokmål Română Simple English Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча 50,000+ articles Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bosanski کوردی Eesti Ελληνικά Frysk Gaeilge Galego Hrvatski ქართული Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių മലയാളം Македонски မြန်မာဘာသာ Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina ไทย తెలుగు اردو Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=1225315602 "

Welcome to Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit . 6,849,038 articles in English From toda's featured article DeLancey W. Gill (1859–1940) was an American drafter , landscape painter , and photographer. As a teenager, he moved in with an aunt in Washington, D.C. , after his mother and stepfather traveled west. He eventually found himself employed as an architectural draftsman for the Treasury . He created sketches and watercolor paintings of the city, with a particular focus on the still-undeveloped rural and poorer areas of the district. While working as an illustrator for the Smithsonian's Bureau of American Ethnology in the 1890s, he was appointed as the agenc's photographer without prior photographic training. He took portrait photographs that circulated widely of thousands of Native American delegates to Washington, including notable figures such as Chief Joseph and Geronimo . These photographs have come under modern criticism for his frequent use of props and clothing, sometimes outdated or inauthentic, given to the delegates. ( Full article... ) Recently featured: Oceanic whitetip shark RoboCop Tales of Monkey Island Archive By email More featured articles About Did you know ... Yevhen Klopotenko ... that Yevhen Klopotenko (pictured) fought a "war for borscht "? ... that a street in San Francisco was named after a man who used a false identity ? ... that Alfie Templeman described the style of his studio album Radiosoul as "incohesively cohesive"? ... that Rosemary Miller won her stat's skeet shooting championship one year after learning the sport, and then won a state shooting championship in all but two years for the rest of her life? ... that the Japanese boy band Nexz was created through the program Nizi Project season 2 ? ... that the Nazi collaborator Sebastiaan de Ranitz abandoned his office following Mad Tuesday , leaving his department in turmoil? ... that Gedling Town F.C.'s nickname "The Ferrymen" was inspired by the name of a pub located next to the tea's stadium? ... that Antonio Dini was the only survivor of a three-man crew after he crashed a plane into the sea, but had no recollection of the crash due to concussion? ... that after a pigeon sculpture in Wellington went missing, members of the public created a memorial for it? Archive Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Keir Starmer The New Popular Front wins the most seats in the National Assembly in the French legislative election but does not achieve a majority . The Labour Party wins the United Kingdom general election and Keir Starmer (pictured) becomes prime minister. Hurricane Beryl , the earliest-recorded Category 5 Atlantic hurricane in a calendar year, leaves at least 15 people dead in the Caribbean , Venezuela, and the United States. In the Netherlands, a new cabinet is sworn in, with Dick Schoof serving as the prime minister . Ongoing : Israel–Hamas war timeline Russian invasion of Ukraine timeline Sudanese civil war timeline Recent deaths : Jane McAlevey Rick Cluff Martti Wallén Audrey Flack Ismail Kadare Hugh Aldons Nominate an article On this day July 10 : Independence Day in the Bahamas ( 1973 ) Martin Luther King Jr. 1645 – English Civil War : The Parliamentarians destroyed the last Royalist field army at the Battle of Langport , ultimately giving Parliament control of the west of England. 1942 – An American naval aviator discovered a downed Japanese Mitsubishi A6M Zero on Akutan Island , Alaska, which was later rebuilt and flown to devise tactics against the aircraft during World War II. 1966 – Martin Luther King Jr. (pictured) led a rally in support of the Chicago Freedom Movement , one of the most ambitious civil-rights campaigns in the northern United States. 1999 – The United States defeated China in the final match of the third FIFA Wome's World Cup , setting records in both attendance and television ratings for wome's sports. 2006 – Typhoon Ewiniar made landfall in South Korea, causing damages across the country amounting to 2.06 trillion won (US$1.4 billion). Arthur Annesley, 1st Earl of Anglesey ( b. 1614) Eva Ekeblad ( b. 1724) Bobo Brazil ( b. 1924) Calogero Vizzini ( d. 1954) More anniversaries: July 9 July 10 July 11 Archive By email List of days of the year Toda's featured picture Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – The central hub for editors, with resources, links, tasks, and announcements. Village pump – Forum for discussions about Wikipedia itself, including policies and technical issues. Site news – Sources of news about Wikipedia and the broader Wikimedia movement. Teahouse – Ask basic questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Help desk – Ask questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Reference desk – Ask research questions about encyclopedic topics. Content portals – A unique way to navigate the encyclopedia. Wikipedi's sister projects Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation , a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects : Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning tools Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English . Many other Wikipedias are available ; some of the largest are listed below. 1,000,000+ articles العربية مصرى Deutsch Español فارسی ‎ Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 250,000+ articles Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gú Български Català Čeština Dansk Esperanto Euskara עברית Հայերեն 한국어 Magyar Norsk bokmål Română Simple English Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча 50,000+ articles Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bosanski کوردی Eesti Ελληνικά Frysk Gaeilge Galego Hrvatski ქართული Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių മലയാളം Македонски မြန်မာဘာသာ Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina ไทย తెలుగు اردو Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=1225315602 "

2024 Indian film Premalu ( transl. Love ) is a 2024 Indian Malayalam -language romantic comedy film  directed by Girish A. D. and produced by Bhavana Studios, in the company of Fahadh Faasil and Friends and Working Class Hero . The film stars Naslen K. Gafoor and Mamitha Baiju , alongside Sangeeth Prathap , Shyam Mohan , Meenakshi Raveendran, Akhila Bhargavan, Mathew Thomas and Althaf Salim. In the film, Sachin Santhosh, a graduate from Kerala , plans on moving to the United Kingdom , but instead goes to Hyderabad and take a GATE course, where he meets and falls in love with Reenu Roy, an employee of an IT company. The film was officially announced in July 2023 under the tentative title Production No. 5 , as it is the fifth production for Bhavana Studios, and the official title was announced in December 2023. Principal photography commenced the same month in Thiruvananthapuram . It was shot in Kochi , Hyderabad , Polachira and wrapped by mid-September 2023. The film has music composed by Vishnu Vijay , cinematography handled by Ajmal Sabu and editing by Akash Joseph Varghese. Premalu was released theatrically on February 9, 2024, to critical acclaim with praise for its performances, script, soundtrack, direction and humor.  It ranks as the sixth highest-grossing Malayalam film of all time and the fourth highest-grossing Malayalam film of 2024 . A sequel, titled Premalu 2 , is in development. Plot [ edit ] On the final day of college in Salem , Sachin Santosh professes his feelings for his classmate Anjali, but she bluntly rejects his proposal. Moving back to his hometown of Aluva , Sachin deals with his parent' soured relationship and plans to pursue higher education in the UK . However, his visa application is rejected due to shortage of funds, leaving him with another opportunity to apply after six months. He begins helping with his fathe's bakery business in the meantime. One day, Sachin runs into his childhood friend, Amal Davis, who asks him to accompany him for a GATE course in Hyderabad . Desperate for a change, Sachin agrees and moves to Hyderabad with Amal. Meanwhile, Reenu Roy, a vivacious young woman, joins the development team of an IT company , Ospyn, in Hyderabad. She moves in with her friend and colleague, Karthika and her friend Niharika. Aadhi, a senior developer from Mumbai and Reen's arrogant colleague, secretly holds a crush on her but masquerades himself as her "bestie". Sachin and Amal attend the wedding of their professor Shobi, whose bride, Shravani is a colleague of Reenu. Sachin is attracted to Reenu from the moment he sees her. Despite engaging in a tiff with Aadhi at their very first meeting, they strike a friendship with Reenu and Karthika. After the wedding, Reenu and Karthika decide to go back to Hyderabad with Sachin and Amal in their Mini Cooper though Aadhi initially disagrees. Sachin, who had planned to quit his course and take up a job in Chennai , decides to stay back for Reenu and persuades Amal to get him a job at his aun's fast-food restaurant . Sachin and Amal move into Reenu and Karthik's neighbourhood and invite them over for a party at a club . At the party, Amal tells Karthika about Sachi's feelings for Reenu.  However, Karthika dissuades them, saying that Reenu is looking for an accomplished and matured person and that she will definitely reject someone like Sachin, who does not have any concrete plans or career. Sachin decides not to disclose his feelings to Reenu yet. They continue to become closer after a few events, including a train journey and an excursion in Hyderabad. Sachin ultimately confesses his feelings to Reenu but she rejects him and inadvertently hurts him by saying that this ca't be his first rejection. A heartbroken Sachin moves to Chennai and takes up odd jobs to make ends meet while ignoring Reen's texts and calls. Karthika shifts to Bangalore to be with her fiancé. Reenu, now alone, begins to realize her true feelings for Sachin and misses him. Some time later, Sachin and Amal attend Karthik's pre-wedding party where they meet Reenu. Sachin pretends to have moved on and tells her about his UK visa approval and his scheduled flight to UK the very next day. Aadhi suddenly solicits Sachin and Amal. Being boozed and tired of Aadh's insinuations, they humiliate him and assert that Reenu will reject him too. Overconfident, Aadhi publicly proposes to Reenu but she unhesitatingly says no, resulting in further taunts from Sachin and Amal. Humiliated, Aadhi leaves the party after swearing vengeance. Sachin, still detached to Reen's sincere attempts, passes out at the party with Amal. The next morning, Sachin and Amal depart for the airport and Reenu joins them. On the way, Reenu tells Sachin that she misses him and does not want him to leave. They then notice Aadhi with some goons chasing them in a Ford Endeavour , and are alarmed. Amidst the tension, Reenu finally confesses her feelings for Sachin. Aadhi and the goons interrupt the moment and begans to beat Sachin. However, Reenu averts the assault using a pepper spray Aadhi himself had given her for self-defense. They escape and arrive at the airport on time. Reenu and Sachin hug and bid farewell to each other and commit to a long-distance relationship . A credits scene shows Reenu, Karthika and Niharika on the rooftop of their apartment some months ago. Niharika tosses an empty can off the roof, foretelling that Reenu will marry whoever the can lands on. Hearing an old man shout, they flee. However, the can is shown to have fallen on Sachin, who was walking with Amal. Cast [ edit ] Naslen K. Gafoor as Sachin Santhosh Mamitha Baiju as Reenu Roy Sangeeth Prathap as Amal Davis, Sachi's friend Shyam Mohan as Aadhi, Reen's officemate Akhila Bhargavan as Karthika, Reen's friend Mathew Thomas as Thomas, Ama's cousin (special appearance) Meenakshi Raveendran as Niharika a.k.a. "Wanderlust", Karthik's roommate Althaf Salim as Shobhi Sir Shameer Khan as Subin George Wincent as Vaisakh Murali Ranjith Narayan Kurup as Thoma' manager K.S. Prasad as Sachi's father Gopu Kesav as Reen's father Rahul P. P. as Vikas Sanju K Thomas as Sanju Dileep Mohan as Jain Syam Pushkaran as Pambavaasan (cameo appearance) Production [ edit ] Development [ edit ] On 4 July 2023, Girish A. D. announced that he would collaborate with Naslen K. Gafoor and Mamitha Baiju for his directorial after I Am Kathalan , which also features Naslen in the lead role, making his third collaboration with the actor. Tentatively titled Production No. 5 , the project would mark as the fifth production for Bhavana Studios; they would fund it in association with Fahadh Faasil and Friends and Working Class Hero .  The fil's official title, Premalu , was announced on 1 December 2023.  Filming [ edit ] Principal photography began with the first schedule on 9 July 2023 with an inaugural puja ceremony at Thiruvananthapuram in Kerala . The project was expected to be shot with a span of 75-days across Kochi , Hyderabad , and Polachira .  Filming wrapped by 15 September.  Music [ edit ] Main article: Premalu (soundtrack) The fil's musical score and songs are composed by Vishnu Vijay . The track "Ya Ya Ya Yadava" by K. S. Chithra and P. Unnikrishnan from the 1996 film Devaraagam (1996) was reused in the film to subsequently become a rage upon the fil's release. Veteran K. G. Markose rendered a song titled "Telangana Bommalu" after a brief hiatus from films.  Release [ edit ] Theatrical [ edit ] Premalu was theatrically released on 9 February 2024.  A Telugu dubbed version was released on 8 March and a Tamil dub followed a week later.  It was released by Bhavana Release in Kerala. Overseas rights acquired by Phars Film Co and Yash Raj Films .  It was distributed across Andhra Pradesh and Telangana by Sri Venkateswara Creations , Annapurna Studios and Showing Business.  In Tamil Nadu, distribution rights were acquired by Udhayanidhi Stalin's Red Giant Movies .  Home media [ edit ] The digital streaming rights were acquired by Disney+ Hotstar and the satellite rights were acquired by Asianet for Malayalam and by Star Network for other languages. The film had its digital premiere on the streaming platform from 12 April 2024.  That same day, the Telugu dub premiered on Aha . Premalu is also available to stream in Tamil and Hindi on Disney+ Hotstar .  Reception [ edit ] Critical response [ edit ] Premalu received positive reviews from critics with praise for its cast performances, music, script, direction, humor and technical aspects. Nikhil Sebastian of Pinkvilla gave 4/5 stars and wrote "Premalu undoubtedly marks Girish A's finest work since Thanneer Mathan Dinangal . If yo're looking to escape from the stresses of life for two and a half hours and immerse yourself in laughter and enjoyment, then look no further—booking a ticket for Premalu is the perfect choice".  Anandu Suresh of The Indian Express gave 3.5/5 stars and wrote "Similar to Girish A's Thanneer Mathan Dinangal and Super Sharanya , this Naslen, Mamitha Baiju-starrer too effectively employs situational and observational comedy. Yet, Girish ensures that Premalu stands apart from his previous works".  Anandu Suresh of The Indian Express gave 3.5/5 stars and wrote "Similar to Girish A's Thanneer Mathan Dinangal and Super Sharanya , this Naslen, Mamitha Baiju-starrer too effectively employs situational and observational comedy. Yet, Girish ensures that Premalu stands apart from his previous works."  Gayathri Krishna of OTTplay gave 3.5/5 stars and wrote "Naslen and Mamitha Baiju-starrer Premalu serves as a decent romantic comedy, which makes it watchable again, much like Girish A's earlier films".  S. R. Praveen of The Hindu wrote "Though Thanneer Mathan.. was quite a winning debut for Girish, Super Sharanya was only half as satisfying. He has upped the game in his third outing, as Premalu is a winner with its fresh, humorous treatment of a run-of-the-mill story."  Aswin Devan of The New Indian Express wrote "The distinctive style we have seen in Giris's previous films like Thanneermathan Dinangal and Super Sharanya , is all the more pronounced in Premalu ".  Box office [ edit ] As of 21 March 2024, Premalu has grossed over ₹ 95 crore in India, with a further ₹ 40 crore in overseas, for a worldwide total of ₹ 136 crore. Sequel [ edit ] On 19 April 2024, a sequel titled Premalu 2 was announced by the team during the fil's success celebration. The film is scheduled for release in 2025.

Indian actor and producer (born 1982) Fahadh Fazil (born 8 August 1982), professionally known as Fahadh Faasil , is an Indian actor and producer who predominantly works in Malayalam and Tamil films. He is widely regarded as one of the greatest Indian  actors of his generation, he has consistently delivered remarkable performances throughout his career, and noted for his diverse portrayals, Fahadh is among the highest-paid Malayalam actors. He is one of the most popular Malayalam actors of all times.   Fahadh is a recipient of several accolades including a National Film Award , four Kerala State Film Awards and three Filmfare Awards South .  Fahadh is the son of filmmaker Fazil . Fahadh began his film career at the age of 20 by starring in the leading role in his father Fazil's 2002 romantic film Kaiyethum Doorath , which was a critical and commercial failure. After a gap of 7 years, Fahadh made his comeback with the anthology film Kerala Cafe (2009), in the short film Mrityunjayam . He attained public attention for his role as Arjun in the thriller film Chaappa Kurishu (2011). Fahadh won his first Kerala State Film Award , the Best Supporting Actor Award for his performance in Chaappa Kurishu along with his performance in Akam . He achieved critical acclaim and recognition for his roles as Cyril in 22 Female Kottayam (2012) and Dr. Arun Kumar in Diamond Necklace (2012). He won his first Filmfare Award for Best Actor for his role in 22 Female Kottayam .  Fahadh achieved further critical and commercial success for his films in 2013, including his performances in the romantic-drama film Annayum Rasoolum , the black-comedy satire film Amen , the road movie North 24 Kaatham , the drama film Artist , and the romantic-comedy Oru Indian Pranayakadha . He won the Kerala State Film Award for Best Actor for his performances as Michael in Artist and Harikrishnan in North 24 Kaatham . He also won his second Filmfare Award for Best Actor for his role in North 24 Kaatham .  He followed it up by starring as Shivadas in the coming-of-age drama film Bangalore Days (2014), which ranks among the highest-grossing Malayalam films . He produced and starred as Aloshy in the 2014 period film Iyobinte Pusthakam under his production company, Fahadh Faasil and Friends Pvt Ltd. Fahadh also has a Digital Entertainment Company/Movie Production House named Bhavana Studios partnered with Dileesh Pothan and Syam Pushkaran . Fahadh had roles as Mahesh Bhavana in Maheshinte Prathikaaram (2016), Indian diplomat Manoj Abraham in Take Off (2017), and Prasad in Thondimuthalum Driksakshiyum (2017), with Maheshinte Prathikaaram and Thondimuthalum Driksakshiyum winning the Best Feature Film in Malayalam Award at the 64th and 65th National Film Awards .  He won the National Film Award for Best Supporting Actor for his performance in Thondimuthalum Driksakshiyum (2017) and his third Filmfare Award for Best Actor – Malayalam . In 2018, he acted as Prakashan in the film Njan Prakashan which ranks among highest-grossing Malayalam films and as Aby in the film Varathan . In 2021, he portrayed the titular anti-hero in the crime drama Joji which received acclaim. Fahadh later received nationwide acclaim for his performance in the political thriller Malik (2021), the action thriller Vikram (2022) and the action comedy Aavesham (2024).  Fahadh is a celebrity endorser for several brands and products and is a philanthropist. Fahadh is married to actress Nazriya Nazim . Early life and background [ edit ] Fahadh Faasil was born as Abdul Hameed Mohammed Fahadh Fazil, on 8 August 1982,   in Alappuzha , Kerala , to film director Fazil and his wife, Rozina.  He has two sisters, Ahameda and Fatima, and a brother, Farhaan , who is also an actor.   Fahadh completed his schooling from SDV Central School Alappuzha , Lawrence School Ooty and Choice School Tripunithura . He went on to pursue his Bachelo's from SD College , Alleppey and Masters in philosophy from University of Miami in the United States.   Career [ edit ] Debut, comeback and breakthrough (2002–2012) [ edit ] Fahadh made his film debut with his fathe's Kaiyethum Doorath (2002) under the stage name of Shaanu. The film was a failure at the box office.   Regarding his performance, a critic wrote that "Shaanu oozes charm and suits the character of Sachin but he has to work hard on his dancing".  Fahadh later defended his father, stating "do't blame my father for my failure because it was my mistake and I came into acting without any preparation of my own".  After his debut, he moved to the United States for five years, where he pursued his studies,  before returning in 2009 to act in the film Kerala Cafe (2009), conceived by director Ranjith .  At Ranjit's behest, director Uday Ananthan cast Fahad in his Mrityunjayam , one of the 10 shorts in the film.  He played the role of a journalist in the Mrityunjayam , a ghost film set on a spooky old'Man'. He was chosen to co-star in B. Unnikrishnan's Pramani . He then appeared as a business head in the thriller Cocktail (2010). His next film, Tournament , was also a thriller. He appeared in Sameer Thahir's directorial debut Chaappa Kurishu (2011), a thriller in which he played the head of a construction business. "Arjun – my character in Chappa Kurishu is not a role that an actor gets often. I am very lucky and very fortunate," Fahad said. He shot a long kissing scene with his co-star Remya Nambeesan in the film – supposedly the first-ever in Malayalam cinema – which upon release was termed controversial.  In Fahad's next film, Akam (2011), a contemporary adaptation of Malayattoor Ramakrishnan's psycho-thriller novel Yakshi , he played Srinivas , a young architect who starts suspecting that his beautiful wife is a yakshi . "Playing Srinivas was like re-inventing myself. We had a workshop before shooting began and I had ample opportunity to explore the nuances of the character. In the process of re-inventing Srinivas, I reinvented myself," said Fahadh.  The film premiered at the Dubai International Film Festival . He won the Kerala State Film Award for Second Best Actor in 2012 for his performance in Chappa Kurishu and Akam.  In 2012, he played a negative character in 22 Female Kottayam , a rape and revenge film, which was critically acclaimed.  In his next film, Lal Jose's Diamond Necklace (2012), he played the role of an oncologist working in Dubai and the film centred on the docto's relationship with three different women.  Both the films 22 Female Kottayam and Diamond Necklace were a commercial and critical success and ran over 100 days in theatres.  In June 2012, a case was registered against Fahadh by the Kochi Town Central Police for violation of the rule against public display of images of smoking. A poster of Diamond Necklace that showed him smoking a cigarette had been on display before the Kavitha Theatre in Kochi since the film was released.  In his next film, Lijin Jos's Friday (2012) he played an auto rickshaw driver.  The same year, he appeared in The Day of Judgement , one of the three featurettes from the portmanteau film D Company .  Established actor and critical acclaim (2013–2017) [ edit ] In the year 2013, he was in cinematographer Rajeev Ravi's directorial debut Annayum Rasoolum , Lijo Jose Pellissery's Amen , V. K. Prakash's Natholi Oru Cheriya Meenalla , Salam Bapp's directorial debut Red Wine , debutant Anil Radhakrishnan Menon's North 24 Kaatham and Sathyan Anthikad's Oru Indian Pranayakatha . He won Kerala State Film Award for Best Actor for his performance in North 24 Kaatham .  Amen was both commercial and critical success and was named as one of the best films of the year by Khaleej Times  while Annayum Rasoolum managed to be commercial success.   Oru Indian Prayankatha was a sleeper hit . In 2014, he acted in the big budget movie Iyobinte Pusthakam , which he himself produced. Fahadh also played a major role in the multi-starrer blockbuster movie Bangalore Days . It is considered one of the best Malayalam movies made during the New gen movement.  In 2015 he starred in Ayal Njanalla , Haram , Mariyam Mukku , none of which performed well at the box office. In 2016, his first release, Monsoon Mangoes , failed at the box office, even though his performance was highly praised and the movie gathered mixed critic responses.    His next release was on 5 February 2016 Maheshinte Prathikaaram which was a commercial success and a major breakthrough in his career.  In 2017, he acted in four films out of which Take Off and Thondimuthalum Driksakshiyum were commercial and critical success.  Thondimuthalum Driksakshiyum won three awards at the 65th National Film Awards . Besides Best Malayalam Film and Best Screenplay for the film, Fahadh won in the Best Supporting Actor category.  Fahadh made his debut in Tamil cinema , through the film Velaikkaran starring Sivakarthikeyan , opposite whom he plays the antagonist.  Experimentation of genres and stardom (2018–present) [ edit ] Fahadh got back to back critical and box office successes with Varathan (2018), Njan Prakashan (2018) and Kumbalangi Nights (2019), which collectively grossed more than ₹ 100 crore at the box office.  He played the character Shammi in Kumbalangi Nights , which developed a cult following with many of his dialogues becoming popular.  Njan Prakashan collected ₹52 crore from Worldwide box office, which is one of the highest grossing Malayalam film till date.  His last film in 2019 was the psychological thriller Athiran , where he played the role of a psychiatrist. It largely received positive reviews and performed well at box office.  His next Tamil film was Super Deluxe , in which he co-starred alongside Vijay Sethupathi , Samantha Ruth Prabhu and Ramya Krishnan .  Fahadh in 2018 His first release in 2020, Trance received wide acclaim from critics. The Indian Express praised Fahad's performance and said: "Fahadh steals the limelight by portraying a character that is hysteric and disturbing at the same time".  After Trance , Fahadh turned to do films released through OTT platforms amid the COVID-19 pandemic in India . Among this, the first movie was C U Soon (2020), which is Indi's first computer screen film . It generally received positive reviews from critics.  His first release in 2021 was Irul , a mystery thriller released on streaming platform Netflix on 2 April 2021. Despite the film received mixed reviews due to its complex story, Fahadh received critical acclaim for portraying a mysterious character.  Five days after the release of Irul came out Joji , which is a crime drama directed by Dileesh Pothan. The movie in which he played the titular anti-hero received well acclaim from critics. His performance in it is also considered one of his career best by some critics and fans.   Firstpost wrote: "The story is unequivocally centred around Fahad's character, and the actor plays a deceptively calm layabout simmering with rage with the sort of unassuming brilliance that is now his trademark".  Nearly a week after the release of Joji , reports came out that the Film Exhibitors United Organisation of Kerala (FEUOK) has warned Fahadh against acting in movies made for streaming through OTT platforms.  It was also reported that FEUOK has also threatened that his next big movies in 2021 like Malik will face difficulties for screening on the big screen if he continues to cooperate with OTT platforms as a consequence.  But the organisation later claimed that all such news were baseless and they no connection with them.  Fahad's next release in 2021 was Mahesh Narayanan's big budget political thriller Malik . The film which was supposed to release in 2020 was also Fahad's most expensive Malayalam film to date. Besides Fahadh, the film stars Nimisha Sajayan, Vinay Forrt, Dileesh Pothan and Joju George in pivotal roles.  Malik received nationwide acclaim from critics  and large positive feedback from fans, with many critics describing Fahad's performance in the film as arguably his career best.     Fahadh made his debut in Telugu cinema with Pushpa: The Rise (2021) as the antagonist of the film.  In 2022, he was seen along with Kamal Haasan in the film Vikram as Amar, a black-ops agent. His film, Dhoomam , was a collaboration with Hombale Films , marking their maiden venture in Malayalam. In 2023, Fahadh portrayed Rathnavelu, a villain, in the film Maamannan along with Vadivelu . His performance garnered widespread acclaim. His portrayal and the fil's success even sparked a trend in meme culture.  Filmography [ edit ] Main article: Fahadh Faasil filmography Personal life [ edit ] On 20 January 2014, he got engaged to Malayalam film actress Nazriya Nazim  whom he married on 21 August 2014 at Trivandrum .   The pair got to know each other more on the sets of Anjali Menon's Bangalore Days (2014), in which they played the roles of husband and wife. Fahadh revealed that their parents had been pivotal in arranging the marriage.   In 2024, he said he has attention deficit hyperactivity disorder .  Acting style and media image [ edit ] Fahadh is considered among the most popular and highest-paid actors of Malayalam cinema , according to various media reports.   Fahadh is noted for playing a variety of roles in a variety of genres. Princy Alexander of Onmanorama called him a "force to reckon with".  Writing for The News Minute , Fahir Maithutty called him a front-runner of the New Generation Wave and said, "Fahadh possesses traits that set him apart as an actor — his command over dialects and his ability to transform to any character."  Anandu Suresh of The Indian Express talked about his career comeback and noted, "The new Fahadh displayed remarkable growth and maturity. His second innings made him one of contemporary Indian cinema’s finest actors."  Neelima Menon of HuffPost stated, "Most of his notable films are character-driven and many of his characters have been flawed, vulnerable heroes. He is a product of new-age Malayalam cinema, where superstardom has begun to wane, and alpha male heroes have been exiled.  Film critic Aparna Prashanthi opined: "He is an actor in the purest sense. He isn’t addicted to stardom nor is he particular about drawing all the attention to himself in a film. He just wants to be part of good cinema."  Rediff.com named Fahad the "Best Malayalam Actor" of 2012 and 2013.   Fahadh is a celebrity endorser for brands and products such as Titan , Milma , Jos Alukkas , Adithi Aatta, UAE Exchange , Estilocus and Camerry Icecreams.   In the Kochi Times Most Desirable Men list, Fahadh was placed in 5th 2017, 2nd in 2018, 7th in 2019 and 8th in 2020.     His performance in Maheshinte Prathikaram and Thondimuthalum Driksakshiyum is regarded as one of the "100 Greatest Performances of the Decade" by Film Companion .  In 2019 and 2022, the Indian edition of GQ featured Fahadh among the natio's most influential young people and credited him for "choosing scripts with an edge, and pouring himself into his parts with conviction".   Awards and nominations [ edit ]

Malayalam film director and actor Dileesh Philip (born 19 February 1980), also known as Dileesh Pothan is an Indian film director, actor and producer, who works in Malayalam cinema .  He made his directorial debut with the 2016 comedy drama film Maheshinte Prathikaaram , starring Fahadh Faasil . The film received the Best Feature Film in Malayalam Award at the 64th National Film Awards . Pothan also won the Best Director Award at the 64th Filmfare Awards South .   Pothan began his career as an associate director to the 2010 film 9 KK Road . He served as an assistant director under Aashiq Abu , assisting in five of Aashi's films. He made his acting debut as a film director in one scene in Aashiq Ab's 2011 film Salt ' Pepper . His second directional was Thondimuthalum Driksakshiyum (2017), which was also a critical and commercial hit.  Thondimuthalum Driksakshiyum won the Best Feature Film in Malayalam Award as well at the 65th National Film Awards . His third and latest film Joji , also starring Fahadh Faasil, released to highly positive reviews on the OTT platform of Amazon Prime Video in April 2021.   Joji won the best International Film Award at the Swedish International Film Festival (SIFF 2021).  Personal life [ edit ] Pothan was born in Omalloor of Manjoor panchayat -village in northern Kottayam district , Kerala . He did his schooling at Emmanue's High School, Kothanalloor . After pre-degree from Kuriakose Elias College, Mannanam, he pursued a BSc degree at St. Philomen's College, Mysore . Due to his keen interest in drama and cinema, he followed up with an M.A. in Theatre Arts at Sree Sankaracharya University of Sanskrit , Kalady and an M.Phil. in Theatre Arts from Mahatma Gandhi University , Kottayam. Pothan married Jimsy in December 2012 at St. Thomas Church, Kuruppanthara. They have a daughter and a son.   Film career [ edit ] Pothan started his film career as an assistant director in the film 9 KK Road (2010). Later on he became an associate director to Aashiq Abu . He assisted Aashiq Abu in films like 22 Female Kottayam (2012), Da Thadiya (2012), and Gangster (2014).  He was the chief associate director in Dileesh Nair's 2014 film Tamaar Padaar .  His first appearance in front of a movie camera was as a junior artist in the movie Chandranudikunna Dikkil (1999) directed by Lal Jose. Later his first proper role as an actor was in Salt ' Pepper. He has also acted in small roles mostly in Aashiq Ab's films, Salt ' Pepper (2011), 22 Female Kottayam (2012), Idukki Gold (2013), Gangster (2014), Iyobinte Pusthakam (2014), and Rani Padmini (2015). He has acted in several films since then. Pothan ventured into film production by forming the film production company Working Class Hero in 2018, partnered by Syam Pushkaran . Their first movie was Kumbalangi Nights .  Filmography [ edit ] All films are in Malayalam language unless otherwise noted . As director [ edit ] As producer [ edit ] As actor [ edit ] As associate director [ edit ] 3 char sau bees (2010) 22 Female Kottayam (2012) Da Thadiya (2012) 5 Sundarikal (2013) Idukki Gold (2013) Gangster (2013) Tamaar Padaar (2014) Awards [ edit ] Filmmaking style [ edit ] Potha's filmmaking style―flirting with molecule level details, imbuing vibrance; one of its kind and stamping touches of sensationalism , is from the KG George school [ citation needed ] . But Pothan is also singularly distinctive in his approach, which is a delectable medley of native roots (classy old-school) and modern kerala [ citation needed ] . In Maheshinte Prathikaram , Pothan charts a butterfly effect idiom through remarkable attention for detail and sensational film language, using every medium―song, sky, rain, space, place and drama with consummated precision.

Welcome to Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit . 6,849,038 articles in English From toda's featured article DeLancey W. Gill (1859–1940) was an American drafter , landscape painter , and photographer. As a teenager, he moved in with an aunt in Washington, D.C. , after his mother and stepfather traveled west. He eventually found himself employed as an architectural draftsman for the Treasury . He created sketches and watercolor paintings of the city, with a particular focus on the still-undeveloped rural and poorer areas of the district. While working as an illustrator for the Smithsonian's Bureau of American Ethnology in the 1890s, he was appointed as the agenc's photographer without prior photographic training. He took portrait photographs that circulated widely of thousands of Native American delegates to Washington, including notable figures such as Chief Joseph and Geronimo . These photographs have come under modern criticism for his frequent use of props and clothing, sometimes outdated or inauthentic, given to the delegates. ( Full article... ) Recently featured: Oceanic whitetip shark RoboCop Tales of Monkey Island Archive By email More featured articles About Did you know ... Yevhen Klopotenko ... that Yevhen Klopotenko (pictured) fought a "war for borscht "? ... that a street in San Francisco was named after a man who used a false identity ? ... that Alfie Templeman described the style of his studio album Radiosoul as "incohesively cohesive"? ... that Rosemary Miller won her stat's skeet shooting championship one year after learning the sport, and then won a state shooting championship in all but two years for the rest of her life? ... that the Japanese boy band Nexz was created through the program Nizi Project season 2 ? ... that the Nazi collaborator Sebastiaan de Ranitz abandoned his office following Mad Tuesday , leaving his department in turmoil? ... that Gedling Town F.C.'s nickname "The Ferrymen" was inspired by the name of a pub located next to the tea's stadium? ... that Antonio Dini was the only survivor of a three-man crew after he crashed a plane into the sea, but had no recollection of the crash due to concussion? ... that after a pigeon sculpture in Wellington went missing, members of the public created a memorial for it? Archive Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Keir Starmer The New Popular Front wins the most seats in the National Assembly in the French legislative election but does not achieve a majority . The Labour Party wins the United Kingdom general election and Keir Starmer (pictured) becomes prime minister. Hurricane Beryl , the earliest-recorded Category 5 Atlantic hurricane in a calendar year, leaves at least 15 people dead in the Caribbean , Venezuela, and the United States. In the Netherlands, a new cabinet is sworn in, with Dick Schoof serving as the prime minister . Ongoing : Israel–Hamas war timeline Russian invasion of Ukraine timeline Sudanese civil war timeline Recent deaths : Jane McAlevey Rick Cluff Martti Wallén Audrey Flack Ismail Kadare Hugh Aldons Nominate an article On this day July 10 : Independence Day in the Bahamas ( 1973 ) Martin Luther King Jr. 1645 – English Civil War : The Parliamentarians destroyed the last Royalist field army at the Battle of Langport , ultimately giving Parliament control of the west of England. 1942 – An American naval aviator discovered a downed Japanese Mitsubishi A6M Zero on Akutan Island , Alaska, which was later rebuilt and flown to devise tactics against the aircraft during World War II. 1966 – Martin Luther King Jr. (pictured) led a rally in support of the Chicago Freedom Movement , one of the most ambitious civil-rights campaigns in the northern United States. 1999 – The United States defeated China in the final match of the third FIFA Wome's World Cup , setting records in both attendance and television ratings for wome's sports. 2006 – Typhoon Ewiniar made landfall in South Korea, causing damages across the country amounting to 2.06 trillion won (US$1.4 billion). Arthur Annesley, 1st Earl of Anglesey ( b. 1614) Eva Ekeblad ( b. 1724) Bobo Brazil ( b. 1924) Calogero Vizzini ( d. 1954) More anniversaries: July 9 July 10 July 11 Archive By email List of days of the year Toda's featured picture Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – The central hub for editors, with resources, links, tasks, and announcements. Village pump – Forum for discussions about Wikipedia itself, including policies and technical issues. Site news – Sources of news about Wikipedia and the broader Wikimedia movement. Teahouse – Ask basic questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Help desk – Ask questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Reference desk – Ask research questions about encyclopedic topics. Content portals – A unique way to navigate the encyclopedia. Wikipedi's sister projects Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation , a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects : Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning tools Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English . Many other Wikipedias are available ; some of the largest are listed below. 1,000,000+ articles العربية مصرى Deutsch Español فارسی ‎ Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 250,000+ articles Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gú Български Català Čeština Dansk Esperanto Euskara עברית Հայերեն 한국어 Magyar Norsk bokmål Română Simple English Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча 50,000+ articles Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bosanski کوردی Eesti Ελληνικά Frysk Gaeilge Galego Hrvatski ქართული Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių മലയാളം Македонски မြန်မာဘာသာ Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina ไทย తెలుగు اردو Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=1225315602 "

2024 Indian film Guruvayoor Ambalanadayil ( transl. Infront of Guruvayoor Temple ) is an Indian Malayalam -language comedy film directed by Vipin Das and written by Deepu Pradeep . It was jointly produced by Prithviraj Productions and E4 Entertainment. The film stars Prithviraj Sukumaran , Basil Joseph , Nikhila Vimal , Anaswara Rajan and Yogi Babu (in his Malayalam debut ).   The film was released on 16 May 2024, and received positive reviews from the critics was a commercial success and became 8th highest grossing Malayalam film and 5th highest grossing Malayalam film of 2024 .  Plot Vinu Ramachandran is a young executive working in Dubai . He is engaged to Anjali and forms a close acquaintance with her brother, Anandan, who works as a plant manager at a factory in Jamshedpur . It has been five years since Vin's breakup with his ex-girlfriend, Parvathy but he still is't able to move-on. Anandan coaches Vinu in overcoming his feelings of betrayal. However, Anandan is also not leading a perfectly happy life, as he is temporarily separated from his wife Parvathy, after an unknown love letter had arrived to her. Vinu, who now considers Anandan as the brother he never had, he takes it upon himself to ensure happiness in Ananda's life as well and helps him to reunite with Parvathy. However, things go haywire when Vinu and Anandan meet in-person for the first time as it turns out that the Parvathy in both of their lives happens to be the same person. This causes a rift in their cordial relationship. Anandan, wh's a short tempered man immediately sets out to stop the wedding. Vinu also initially tries to stop the wedding due to the awkward situation with the help of his friends. He enlists his colleague Kunjunn's help as well to stop the wedding, but Kunjunni backs out since Anandan is his friend from school as well, and he does't want to get involved. Later Vinu, after talking with Anjali, realizes their happiness is what matters, and decides to proceed with the wedding. Kunjunni meanwhile decides to help Vinu and tries to ruin the wedding, but an angry Vinu slaps him, leading to Kunjunni joining Ananda's side to try to stop the wedding at all cost. Vinu attempts to stop Anandan along with the help of his friends and younger brother, whereas Anandan tries to stop the wedding at any cost, with the help of his uncles. His uncles have their own agenda to create problems for Ananda's family, since they are in a fight with Ananda's father. Meanwhile, Vin's old friend turned enemy, Saravanan, whose marriage he had ruined unintentionally, as well as a stalker, George, who used to follow Anjali, try to stop the wedding by themselves. Finally, on the day of the wedding, Anandan gets closure after talking with Parvathy and her father as well as his own parents and realises that they had known about the situation long ago. He realises that the love letter sent to Parvathy was sent by his uncles with Kunjunn's help to create a rift in the family. After learning the truth and realising his mistake, Anandan trashes up Saravanan, George and Kunjunni as well as his uncles and proceeds to prevent any disruption of the wedding. Finally, Vinu marries Anjali amidst all the chaos and makes peace with Parvathy. The story ends happily with Vinu and Anjali, as well as Anandan and Parvathy, happy together. Cast Prithviraj Sukumaran as Anandan Sudevan, Vin's brother-in-law Basil Joseph as Kaitholaparambil Vinu Ramachandran, Ananda's brother-in-law Nikhila Vimal as Parvathy, Ananda's wife Anaswara Rajan as Anjali Sudevan, Ananda's sister and Vin's fiancée Yogi Babu as Saravanan, Vin's friend Siju Sunny as Shamsudheen, Vin's friend Saaf as Kaitholaparambil Anirudh "Ani" Ramachandran, Vin's younger brother Jagadish as Sudevan, Ananda's and Anjal's father Baiju Santhosh as Dr. Purushothaman, Parvath's father Rekha as Raji Sudevan, Ananda's and Anjal's mother Irshad as Murali (Cheriyammavan) Ramesh Kottayam as Valiyammavan P. P. Kunhikrishnan as Kaitholapparambil Ramachandran, Vin's father Usha Chandrababu as Vin's mother Kudassanad Kanakam as Ramani Joemon Jyothir as Dr. George, Anjal's stalker Akhil Kavaliyoor as Kunjunni, Vin's colleague Aswin Vijayan as Mayinkutty V, Vin's friend Baby Nandu as Appoos, Ananda's and Parvath's son Aju Varghese as playback singer at Guruvayur Temple (cameo appearance) Aravind Akash as Unnikrishnan/Lord Krishna (special appearance) Production Development The story was told to Prithviraj Sukumaran by screenwriter Deepu Pradeep some years back. At that time, Prithviraj was supposed to do the role of Vinu. Initially, another director was supposed to take over the project before Vipin Das came on board.  Filming Principal photography began on 12 May 2023.  A set replicating the Guruvayur Temple was constructed at Karattupallikkara in Perumbavoor municipality.  The second schedule of filming underwent in Dubai and concluded in early July.  Prithviraj was supposed to join the filming during the third schedule, but it was delayed due to an injury sustained on the sets of Vilayath Buddha . He eventually joined the film in the last week of November in Guruvayur .  The fourth schedule was concluded in Kochi by early January 2024.  The entire filming was wrapped up on 4 April 2024.  Music The music and background score was composed by Ankit Menon and Dabzee . The audio rights were acquired by Saregama . The first single "K For Krishna" was released on 5 May 2024.  The second single "K For Kalyanam" was released on 14 May 2024.  The third single "K for Krishna 1.5x Retreat" was released on 21 May 2024 after the fil's release.  The fourth single "K For Kabaradakkam" was released on 25 May 2024 after the fil's release.  The last single "K For Kurukku" was released on 28 May 2024.  The entire soundtrack album was released on 8 June 2024. [ citation needed ] Release Theatrical The film was released in theatres on 16 May 2024.  Home media The post-theatrical streaming rights of the film were bought by Disney+ Hotstar and started streaming from 27 June 2024,  and the satellite rights by Asianet .  Reception Critical reception On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , 60% of 5 critic' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 5/10.  Arjun Menon of Rediff.com rated 3.5/5 stars and observed, " Guruvayoorambala Nadayil is a no-holds-barred, silly comedy that will keep you glued to the screen even when the going gets tough towards the end but the smile on your face will not leave."  Box office The film became a super hit, surpassing the 50 crore benchmark at the box office within a week of its release.

Indian actor, film director, producer (born 1982) Prithviraj Sukumaran ( /pr̩t̪ʰʋiɾaːd͡ʒ/ ; born 16 October 1982) is an Indian actor, director, producer and playback singer primarily active in Malayalam cinema .  He has also featured in Tamil , Hindi and Telugu films, adding to over a 100 films involving diverse genres and variety of roles.  Prithvira's accolades include a National Film Award , three Kerala State Film Awards , a Tamil Nadu State Film Award , seven SIIMA Awards and a South Filmfare Award .  Prithviraj made his acting debut with the 2002 hit film Nandanam (2002).  After a career downturn, he made a comeback with Classmates (2006), the highest-grossing Malayalam film of the year, and became the youngest recipient of Kerala State Film Award for Best Actor for Vaasthavam (2006). He then played a musician in the Tamil romantic comedy Mozhi (2007) and ventured into playback singing with Puthiya Mukham (2009) before earning his second Kerala State Film Award for Best Actor for the medical drama Ayalum Njanum Thammil and biographical film Celluloid (both 2010).  In 2010, Prithviraj joined the production house August Cinema. He co-produced and headlined Urumi and Indian Rupee (both 2011); the latter won the National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Malayalam and Kerala State Film Award for Best Film .  He won the Tamil Nadu State Film Award for Best Villain for Kaaviya Thalaivan (2014) and had further success with Ennu Ninte Moideen (2015) and Ezra (2017). After leaving August Cinema in 2017, he launched Prithviraj Productions independently that firstly backed 9 (2019). Prithviraj made his directorial debut with Lucifer (2019), the highest-grossing Malayalam film at that point. He has since achieved critical and commercial success with Driving License (2019), Ayyappanum Koshiyum (2020), Jana Gana Mana (2022), Kaduva (2022), The Goat Life (2024) and Guruvayoor Ambalanadayil (2024) and played a pivotal role in the  Telugu action film Salaar (2023).     Early life, family and education [ edit ] Prithviraj Sukumaran was born on 16 October, 1982  to the actors Sukumaran and Mallika Sukumaran  at Thiruvananthapuram .  His family was settled in Tamil Nadu at the time, where he attended Shrine Vailankanni Senior Secondary School in T. Nagar, Chennai, and St. Josep's Boys School , Coonoor .  When the family moved to Kerala, he attended the NSS Public School, Perunthanni.  He then moved to St. Mar's Residential Central School , Poojappura where he acted in plays and skits for the schoo's Annual Day Celebrations. He completed his education at Sainik School, Kazhakootam and Bhava's Senior Secondary School, Kodunganoor . He also participated and won several debates and elocution competitions while in school.   Prithviraj won the title of "Mr LA Fest" in the Annual Inter-School arts festival hosted by Loyola School, Thiruvananthapuram in successive years and is the only person to date to win that title twice.  After school, he studied for a bachelo's degree in Information Technology at the University of Tasmania in Australia. During this time, he auditioned for film director Ranjith and won the lead role in the film Nandanam .  It was film director Fazil who introduced him to Ranjith.  His elder brother Indrajith Sukumaran and sister-in-law Poornima Indrajith are also film actors. Career [ edit ] Debut and career struggles (2002–2008) [ edit ] In 2001, Prithviraj underwent a screen-test by director Fazil for one of his projects. Even though that project never materialised, Fazil recommended him to director Ranjith, who was planning his second directorial, Nandanam (2002), Prithviraj underwent screen-test for the role and got selected. Though Nandanam was the first film that Prithviraj acted in, it was released after Nakshathrakkannulla Rajakumaran Avanundoru Rajakumari and Stop Violence . Prithviraj then appeared in films directed by Lohithadas , Vinayan , Kamal and Bhadran . Shyamaprasad , who cast him in lead role in his film Akale , said that Prithv's advantages are his talent and intelligence irrespective of his box office successes.  Prithviraj in 2005 In 2005, Prithviraj Sukumaran debuted in Tamil through Kana Kandaen .  In 2006, Prithviraj co-starred with actor Bhagyara's daughter Saranya Bhagyaraj in Parijatham . It has been acclaimed as a hit and gave the actor a turning point in his Tamil film career.  In 2006, he played the role of Sub Inspector Solomon Joseph in Vargam , then appeared in Vaasthavam , for which he received the Kerala State Film Award for Best Actor .  He was the youngest actor to win the award.  The same year he starred in Lal Jose's Classmates . In 2007, he starred in Chocolate , directed by Shafi.  In 2007, Prithviraj co-starred in Mozhi . He also starred in Satham Podathey and Kannamoochi Yenada in the same year. In 2008, he starred in Thalappavu , (directed by Madhupal ) and Thirakkatha (directed by Ranjith), playing pivotal characters in both. One of the reviews of Thalappavu describes it as the coming-of-age film for prithviraj describing the "spartan dignity" he brought to his portrayal of the Naxalite Joseph.  The Sify review of Thirakkatha describes it as a "genuine attempt that keeps the viewer engaged until the end".  Both Thalappavu and Thirakkatha shared the award for the best film in the Film Critics Award for 2008. He also made a special appearance in Anjali Menon's Manjadikuru .  In 2008, Prithviraj starred in Vellithirai , the Tamil remake of Udayananu Tharam . Rediff described his performance: "Prithviraj ... makes the best of his assets – his expressive eyes, which glint in fury, soften with love, or brim over with frustrated tears."  Established actor (2009–2012) [ edit ] In 2009, the success of Prithviraj Sukumara's Puthiya Mukham (directed by Diphan) lead to him being called a "Superstar".   His other releases in 2009 were Robin Hood (directed by Joshy) and the anthology film Kerala Cafe . In 2010, Sukumara's notable films were Pokkiri Raja and Anwar , directed by Amal Neerad . He played a cop in Mani Ratnam's Raavanan in 2010 with Vikram playing the main protagonist and his performance was critically acclaimed.  Prithviraj Sukumaran debuted in Telugu through Police Police , which was released in 2010. In 2011, Prithviraj produced his first film, the multilingual Urumi . Other releases in Malayalam include City of God , Manikyakallu , Veettilekkulla Vazhi and Indian Rupee . Reviewers praised Prithviraj Sukumaran for his performance in Indian Rupee , the critic at Nowrunning.com, who described it as his "career best performance".  In 2012, his major releases were Hero , Molly Aunty Rocks! and Ayalum Njanum Thammil , along with cameo roles in Aakashathinte Niram and Manjadikuru . Prithviraj debuted in Bollywood through Aiyyaa , directed by Sachin Kundalkar . Aiyyaa , which was jointly produced by Anurag Kashyap and Viacom 18  released on 12 October 2012. Critical acclaim and further success (2013–2018) [ edit ] Prithviraj in 2012, at an event for Aiyyaa . In 2013, Prithviraj had three releases Celluloid , Mumbai Police and Memories , all of which were critical and commercial successes. He portrayed J.C. Daniel in Celluloid , for which he won his second Kerala State Film Award for Best Actor .  His second hindi film Aurangzeb , directed by Athul Sabharwal,  released on 17 May 2013. His performance was highly praised. In 2014, Prithvira's first major release was London Bridge , which failed at box office; followed by 7th Day , which turned out to become a commercial success. He also did a cameo role in Munnariyippu . His third release of the year, Sapthamashree Thaskaraha was praised by critics and audiences alike.  Prithviraj played one of the main characters in director Vasanthabalan's big budget period film Kaaviya Thalaivan , in which he co-stars with Siddharth . His first release of 2015 was Picket 43 . His second movie of 2015 was Shyamaprasa's Ivide . Prithviraj was widely praised for his acting in the movie. Varun Blake (Prithvira's character in Ivide ) is considered to be one of his best performances till the date. He next appeared in Lijo Jose Pellissery's Double Barrel , which was appreciated for its novelty. His most successful film of the year was Ennu Ninte Moideen , which narrated the tragic love tale of Kanchanamala and Moideen that happened in the 1960s in Mukkam , a riverside village in Kerala. The film opened to critical acclaim, with several critics regarding it as one of the greatest romance films made in Malayalam.   His role as Moideen in the film is regarded as one of the best in his career.  His next releases Amar Akbar Anthony and Anarkali became a major commercial success at the box office, thus completing a hat-trick of hits ending the year. Prithviraj with his mother Mallika Sukumaran and niece Prarthana Indrajith at an event in 2009 Prithviraj had four releases in 2016, debuting with Paavada , a family drama in which he played a drunkard. It met with a positive response and was a commercial success, grossing ₹ 16.34 crore from Kerala box office and ran for 100 days in theatres. His following releases Darvinte Parinamam and James & Alice met with mixed reviews, the former told the story of an ordinary man dealing with a local goon and the latter was a family drama that discussed the matter of life and death. His last release, Oozham , an action thriller directed by Jeethu Joseph was a commercial success, earning ₹ 15.25 crore in 25 days. He played a demolition expert.  In 2017, he starred in the horror film Ezra , which became one of the highest-grossing Malayalam films of the year, grossing ₹ 50 crore worldwide, with ₹ 33 crore from Kerala box office.  He continued the year with Tiyaan , Adam Joan and Vimaanam . Both Tiyaan and Vimaanam were moderate box office hits. Adam Joan collected around 20 crores at the box office and emerging as a superhit. His third hindi film was Naam Shabana in 2017, in which he played the antagonist.  His first release of 2018 was Roshini Dinaka's romantic drama My Story , a commercial failure at the box office. His next two releases were Anjali Menon's drama Koode and Nirmal Sahade's crime drama Ranam . Koode received critical acclaim and was a commercial success, while Ranam met with positive critical response but performed moderately at the box office. In 2018, Prithviraj launched his independent production house, Prithviraj Productions. In 2019, he produced and starred in the science fiction film 9 . The film received critical praise for its novelty, actor' performance, direction and cinematography. It was a box office hit.  Lucifer and beyond (2019–present) [ edit ] Prithviraj made his directorial debut in 2019 with Lucifer , starring Mohanlal . The film became the highest-grossing Malayalam film ever.  He then starred in Driving License (2019), Ayyappanum Koshiyum (2020), Jana Gana Mana (2022), Kaduva (2022) and Salaar: Part 1 – Ceasefire (2023), all of which emerged as box office successes. However, Brothe's Day , Kaapa , and Gold failed at the box office. Dubbing [ edit ] Besides, Prithviraj has had many of his Malayalam films dubbed into Telugu such as Sivapuram in 2006, which was the dubbing of Ananthabhadram and ATM in 2010, which was the dubbing of Robin Hood . The dubbed version of Urumi released in August 2011. Personal life [ edit ] Prithviraj married BBC India reporter Supriya Menon on 25 April 2011 in a private ceremony held in Palakkad .   They have a daughter, born in 2014. His family resides in Thevara , Kochi .   Other ventures [ edit ] Prithviraj Productions is an Indian film production and distribution company based in Kochi , established in 2017 by Prithviraj and his wife Supriya Menon. Since then, it has produced and distributed over 10 films.   Filmography [ edit ] Main article: Prithviraj Sukumaran filmography Awards and nominations [ edit ] Main article: List of awards and nominations received by Prithviraj Sukumaran

Indian film production company E4 Entertainment  is an Indian film production  and distribution company founded by Mukesh R. Mehta and C.V. Sarathi. Established in 2012, the compan's headquarters are located in Chennai , Tamil Nadu.  History [ edit ] Annayum Rasoolum , released in 2012, marked E4 Entertainmen's debut venture. Starring Fahadh Faasil , Andrea Jeremiah, Sunny Wayne , among others, and directed by Rajeev Ravi . [ citation needed ] Following this success, E4 Entertainment ventured into Malayalam cinema with films like Neelakasham Pachakadal Chuvanna Bhoomi directed by Sameer Thahir and North 24 Kaatham  directed by Anil Radhakrishnan Menon. In 2014, Ohm Shanthi Oshaana directed by Jude Anthany Joseph proved to be a breakthrough, completing 100 successful days in 12 screens. [ citation needed ] By early 2017, E4 Entertainment produced Ezra , a Malayalam supernatural horror thriller starring Prithviraj Sukumaran , written and directed by Jay K. Filmed primarily in Fort Kochi and Sri Lanka, Ezra became E4 Entertainmen's highest-grossing film to date. [ citation needed ] Filmography [ edit ] Production [ edit ] Distribution [ edit ] Following are the list of films the company distributed other than the films it produced.

Welcome to Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit . 6,849,038 articles in English From toda's featured article DeLancey W. Gill (1859–1940) was an American drafter , landscape painter , and photographer. As a teenager, he moved in with an aunt in Washington, D.C. , after his mother and stepfather traveled west. He eventually found himself employed as an architectural draftsman for the Treasury . He created sketches and watercolor paintings of the city, with a particular focus on the still-undeveloped rural and poorer areas of the district. While working as an illustrator for the Smithsonian's Bureau of American Ethnology in the 1890s, he was appointed as the agenc's photographer without prior photographic training. He took portrait photographs that circulated widely of thousands of Native American delegates to Washington, including notable figures such as Chief Joseph and Geronimo . These photographs have come under modern criticism for his frequent use of props and clothing, sometimes outdated or inauthentic, given to the delegates. ( Full article... ) Recently featured: Oceanic whitetip shark RoboCop Tales of Monkey Island Archive By email More featured articles About Did you know ... Yevhen Klopotenko ... that Yevhen Klopotenko (pictured) fought a "war for borscht "? ... that a street in San Francisco was named after a man who used a false identity ? ... that Alfie Templeman described the style of his studio album Radiosoul as "incohesively cohesive"? ... that Rosemary Miller won her stat's skeet shooting championship one year after learning the sport, and then won a state shooting championship in all but two years for the rest of her life? ... that the Japanese boy band Nexz was created through the program Nizi Project season 2 ? ... that the Nazi collaborator Sebastiaan de Ranitz abandoned his office following Mad Tuesday , leaving his department in turmoil? ... that Gedling Town F.C.'s nickname "The Ferrymen" was inspired by the name of a pub located next to the tea's stadium? ... that Antonio Dini was the only survivor of a three-man crew after he crashed a plane into the sea, but had no recollection of the crash due to concussion? ... that after a pigeon sculpture in Wellington went missing, members of the public created a memorial for it? Archive Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Keir Starmer The New Popular Front wins the most seats in the National Assembly in the French legislative election but does not achieve a majority . The Labour Party wins the United Kingdom general election and Keir Starmer (pictured) becomes prime minister. Hurricane Beryl , the earliest-recorded Category 5 Atlantic hurricane in a calendar year, leaves at least 15 people dead in the Caribbean , Venezuela, and the United States. In the Netherlands, a new cabinet is sworn in, with Dick Schoof serving as the prime minister . Ongoing : Israel–Hamas war timeline Russian invasion of Ukraine timeline Sudanese civil war timeline Recent deaths : Jane McAlevey Rick Cluff Martti Wallén Audrey Flack Ismail Kadare Hugh Aldons Nominate an article On this day July 10 : Independence Day in the Bahamas ( 1973 ) Martin Luther King Jr. 1645 – English Civil War : The Parliamentarians destroyed the last Royalist field army at the Battle of Langport , ultimately giving Parliament control of the west of England. 1942 – An American naval aviator discovered a downed Japanese Mitsubishi A6M Zero on Akutan Island , Alaska, which was later rebuilt and flown to devise tactics against the aircraft during World War II. 1966 – Martin Luther King Jr. (pictured) led a rally in support of the Chicago Freedom Movement , one of the most ambitious civil-rights campaigns in the northern United States. 1999 – The United States defeated China in the final match of the third FIFA Wome's World Cup , setting records in both attendance and television ratings for wome's sports. 2006 – Typhoon Ewiniar made landfall in South Korea, causing damages across the country amounting to 2.06 trillion won (US$1.4 billion). Arthur Annesley, 1st Earl of Anglesey ( b. 1614) Eva Ekeblad ( b. 1724) Bobo Brazil ( b. 1924) Calogero Vizzini ( d. 1954) More anniversaries: July 9 July 10 July 11 Archive By email List of days of the year Toda's featured picture Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – The central hub for editors, with resources, links, tasks, and announcements. Village pump – Forum for discussions about Wikipedia itself, including policies and technical issues. Site news – Sources of news about Wikipedia and the broader Wikimedia movement. Teahouse – Ask basic questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Help desk – Ask questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Reference desk – Ask research questions about encyclopedic topics. Content portals – A unique way to navigate the encyclopedia. Wikipedi's sister projects Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation , a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects : Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning tools Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English . Many other Wikipedias are available ; some of the largest are listed below. 1,000,000+ articles العربية مصرى Deutsch Español فارسی ‎ Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 250,000+ articles Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gú Български Català Čeština Dansk Esperanto Euskara עברית Հայերեն 한국어 Magyar Norsk bokmål Română Simple English Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча 50,000+ articles Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bosanski کوردی Eesti Ελληνικά Frysk Gaeilge Galego Hrvatski ქართული Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių മലയാളം Македонски မြန်မာဘာသာ Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina ไทย తెలుగు اردو Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=1225315602 "

2024 Indian horror film by Rahul Sadasivan Bramayugam ( transl. The age of madness ) is a 2024 Indian Malayalam -language black-and-white period folk horror film written and directed by Rahul Sadasivan and jointly produced by Night Shift Studios and YNOT Studios . The film stars Mammootty , Arjun Ashokan and Sidharth Bharathan .  It contains elements of sacred mystery , mythical and folklore of Kerala .   Bramayugam was released on 15 February 2024 in black-and-white format.  It received positive reviews from critics, with praise for the cast performances, cinematography, sound design, background score, and production design.   The film was a box office success, grossing over ₹ 85 crore. Plot [ edit ] In 17th century Malabar , Thevan and Koran escape the clutches of the Portuguese slave trade in Ponnani and flee to the east. At night, they camp at the banks of the Bharathappuzha River, but Koran is killed by a Yakshi . Thevan runs away, discovering an abandoned mana in the morning. While stealing a coconut, he is apprehended by the hous's cook. He is brought before the lord of the mana, Kodumon Potti, who asks his whereabouts and upon learning he is a Paanan , requests him to sing a song. He compliments Thevan on the song and insists that he stay the night, despite his desire to leave. The cook, while showing Thevan his room, discourages him from asking questions about the house or the Lor's background. Over the next few days, he discovers from the cook that the Potti is a descendant of Chudalan Potti, who was gifted a demon helper, a Chathan , by the goddess Varahi . His constant torture of the Chathan turned it lunatic, and it went on to kill Chudalan Potti and his family. Kodumon Potti eventually defeated the Chathan and chained him in the mansio's attic. One day, Thevan sees the cook digging a grave in the backyard, presumably for himself. Terrified, he tries to leave, but is unable to. He then realizes that he has lost his memory and that he has been trapped in the manor for months. The cook tells Thevan that the grave is not meant for him, but for Kodumon; the Kodumon downstairs is in fact the Chathan in disguise, and he imprisoned the real Kodumon in the attic and drove him insane, leading to his eventual death. The only way that the cook and Thevan could escape the manor is by defeating the Chathan by dousing an ever-burning lamp located in a secret chamber in the granary, and then trapping it in a special chest. During an argument, the cook steals the key to the chamber from the Chatha's waist. He opens the chamber and blows out the lamp, rendering the Chathan weak. Thevan and the cook set fire to the Chatha's disguised form, and the creature inside emerges. The cook, now revealed to be Kodumo's illicit son, attempts to put on the ring that will give him command over the Chathan and take over the mana, but is stopped by Thevan, who believes that the rin's power will corrupt him. The two start fighting while the fire destroys the manor and it collapses over them. Thevan is shown walking away from the ruins of the mana but is attacked by the cook. During the struggle the cook realizes that he is not the real Thevan, but the Chathan in disguise. The real Thevan is then shown to have died as a result of the mana collapsing. Terrified, the cook runs away into the forest and comes across a Portuguese soldier while crossing a river. Thinking that it is one of the Chatha's tricks, he tries to attack the soldier but gets gunned down. A battalion of Portuguese soldiers emerge from the forest, cross the river, and march towards the now destroyed manor, while the Chathan is seen walking through the forest, wearing the ring. Cast [ edit ] Mammootty as Kodumon Potti Arjun Ashokan as Thevan, a Paanan Sidharth Bharathan as Kodumon Pott's cook Amalda Liz as Yakshi Manikandan R. Achari as Koran, Theva's friend Production [ edit ] Development [ edit ] On August 2023, it was reported that Mammootty and Arjun Ashokan collborating for the first time for a horror thriller film.  The film is directed by Rahul Sadasivan .  On 17 August 2023, Mammootty shared a poster featuring a haunted mansion and revealed that the shooting for the film had begun.  Titled Bramayugam the film was launched on the occasion of Chingam 1 . Chakravarthy Ramachandra launched a production house exclusively for horror films, Night Shift Studios , debuting with Bramayugam . The film was scripted by Rahul Sadasivan and novelist T. D. Ramakrishnan penned the dialogues. At the launch of the film, Sadasivan noted that the story is "rooted in the dark ages of Kerala ".   Shehnad Jalal was announced as the cinematographer and Christo Xavier as the music director, while Jothish Shankar worked on the film as a production designer.  Sadasivan revealed that he wrote Bramayugam before Bhoothakalam during the COVID lockdown , and it took him eight months to complete it. T. D. Ramakrishnan helped him develop the script and make the dialogue nuanced to fit the period the story is set in. As the film is set in the 17th century and being a period film, he conceived it in black-and-white format.  Casting [ edit ] Cast members announced during the fil's launch included Arjun Ashokan , Sidharth Bharathan and Amalda Liz .  Reportedly, Mammootty takes on the role of the antagonist, who allocated 30 days to the film, while Arjun Ashokan portrays the protagonist with 60 days allocated for the film.  On September 2023, Makers revealed a special first look poster of Mammootty on his birthday and as per reports he will be playing a character who practices black magic in the film.  Filming [ edit ] Principal photography for the project began on 17 August 2023, coinciding with the first day of the Kerala New Year .  The shoot started at Kochi's MJI Studios with a customary pooja ceremony.  The film was shot across various cities in Kerala including Ottapalam , Athirapally and Kochi .  Mammootty finished shooting his portions by 16 September.  The filming wrapped on 18 October 2023.  Music [ edit ] The music for the film was composed by Christo Xavier. Din Nath Puthenchery, Ammu, and Maria Alex have penned the lyrics.   Marketing [ edit ] The first look of Mammootty from Bramayugam was released on the acto's birthday, featuring a sinister monochrome image.  The teaser was released on 11 January 2024.  The trailer of the film was released on 10 February 2024, at a grand event held in Abu Dhabi .  Release [ edit ] Theatrical [ edit ] The film theatrically released on 15 February 2024 in Black and White format.  The dubbed versions of the film in Hindi , Tamil , Telugu , and Kannada was released on 23 February 2024.  Home media [ edit ] The film premiered on SonyLIV from 15 March 2024.  Reception [ edit ] Critical response [ edit ] Bramayugam received positive reviews from critics especially for the cast, production design, background score, sound design and Cinematography. Akshay P R of DT Next rated 4/5 and wrote,"Director Rahul Sadasivan is yet again exploring the haunted mansion theme but is quite different from his previous film'Bhoothakala' as it was more of dealing with our own past, but Bramayugam (The Age of Madness) is more of a black and white film, in the horror-thriller genre to explore the power pattern in history."  Nikhil Sebastian of Pinkvilla rated 4/5 and verdicted,"Bramayugam stands out as a cinematic gem that transcends the typical horror genre. With a captivating blend of mystery, drama, and the rich mythical folklore of Kerala, it offers a compelling narrative that captivates audiences".  Sanjith Sidhardhan of OTTplay rated 3.5/5 and reviewed,"Mammootty’s Bramayugam benefits richly from its engaging screenplay, cinematography and performances, which makes the viewer forget that it’s a black-and-white film and lets you enjoy the magic of cinema."  Reviewing for The News Minute , Sukanya Shaji stated,"The heart of this monochrome horror thriller is, of course, Mammootty. Even as Potti makes your stomach churn in disgust, Mammootty makes you want to clap for his versatility as a performer. Arjun Asokan and Sidharth Bharathan perhaps have more screen time than Mammootty, and make good use of it, though some scenes make you think that the characters could have benefitted from the experienced craft of more seasoned actors."  The New Indian Express' Vignesh Madhu rated 3.5/5 and reviewed, "While Bhoothakaalam saw Rahul expertly handling psychology and supernatural elements, he blends folklore and horror in Bramayugam to create a terrifying atmosphere where almost every moment is an event.  Nirmal Jovial from The Week rated 4/5 and verdicted,"Bramayugam has a major reliance on visual storytelling, but its memorability is't derived from visual gimmicks or jump scares. Instead, i's the intricate world-building orchestrated by Sadasivan, with significant support from Ramakrishnan, within a confined yet evocative setting, that truly captivated this reviewer."  Firstpost rated 3/5 and reviewed, "What really drives the film home is the performance by the lead actors. Mammootty is going all out with his out of box choices because this is probably the most sinister, and terrifying character that I have seen him portray. Everything about this film is experiential. Starting from the dark insides of the theaters to the sound and music in the film. It is ethereal how the beautifully all aspects of the film come together to achieve this feat.  Janani K of India Today rated the film 3/5 and said, "‘Bramayugam’, with an intriguing story, gifts you an immersive experience. And Mammootty strikes yet again".  Deccan Herald' s Arun Antony rated 4/5 and reviewed,"Arjun Ashokan surprises as the paanan but Siddharth Bharathan stands out as the cook. Overall ‘Bramayugam’ makes a lasting impression and anyone who is a fan of ‘Tumbbad’ should watch it".  Anna Mathews of The Times of India rated 3.5/5 and wrote,"The script,the direction and art direction cultivates the eerieness and makes the film scary. But the story with bits of class politics and religious philosophy sometimes lacks a flow and does not makes things very clear."  Reviewing for Onmanorama , Swathi P Ajith wrote,"The film seamlessly merges horror, thriller, and folktale elements, with horror subtly woven into the shadows and sounds. Rather than relying on jump scares, the movie crafts a claustrophobic atmosphere, gradually building a sense of terror."  Analysing the film for Onmanorama , Sajesh Mohan wrote about the power politics depicted in the movie,"Rahu's'Bramayuga' and Jij's'My Dear Kuttichatha' depict the manipulation tactics of power-hungry people who ensnare gods and demigods like Chathan, Karinkali, Yakshi, etc., exploiting their vulnerabilities to instil fear and exert control over fellow beings."  Box office [ edit ] The film collected ₹ 3 crore in Kerala on its opening day and grossed over ₹ 32 crore (US$3.8 million) globally in the first weekend.  In six days film collection is stands at ₹ 37.39 crore (US$4.5 million).  In the next three days crossed ₹ 46 crore (US$5.5 million) at the box office.  On eleventh day, the film entered the ₹ 50 crore (US$6.0 million) club.   The Times of India reported that the  worldwide collection is ₹ 52.2 crore (US$6.3 million) and overseas collection is stands at ₹ 24 crore (US$2.9 million) in fifteen days.

Night Shift Studios is an Indian film production company based in Chennai, Tamil Nadu.   History [ edit ] In 2021, YNOT Studios CEO & Producer Chakravarthy Ramachandra founded Night Shift Studios , a genre-centric production house, to exclusively produce horror-thriller genre films from India for a global audience. The company was officially launched in 2023 with the announcement of its maiden project, Bramayugam . Night Shift Studios later launched Night Shift Records music label to oversee the release of soundtracks from its productions. Mammootty starrer Bramayugam  was the first album released through the music label.   Filmography [ edit ] Music [ edit ] On January 1, 2024, Night Shift Studios set up Night Shift Records to oversee the release of soundtracks from films. On January 26, 2024, the studio launched the original soundtrack to the film Bramayugam composed by Christo Xavier.

Indian film production company YNOT Studios (stylised as Y?NOT ) is an Indian film production company in Chennai , Tamil Nadu , established by producer S. Sashikanth . As of 2023, the company has produced 21 feature films, which includes productions made in the Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam and Hindi film industries of India. It has collaborated with filmmakers including Sudha Kongara , Balaji Mohan , Pushkar–Gayathri and Karthik Subbaraj . YNOT Studio' first release was Tamil cinem's first parody film Thamizh Padam (2010), which featured a predominantly new technical crew and a rookie star cast. The film became a commercial success and the first of many "new-wave cinema" projects that the company chose to specialise in.  Subsequent successful ventures included Balaji Moha's romantic comedy films Kadhalil Sodhappuvadhu Yeppadi (2013) and Vaayai Moodi Pesavum (2014), which were recognised by critics for their innovative narratives. The company also produced Vasanthabalan's period drama Kaaviya Thalaivan (2014), which focused on the competition between two theatre artistes in the 1930s and had a popular soundtrack composed by A. R. Rahman . YNOT Studios produced several profitable films from 2016 onwards, with Sudha Kongar's sports drama Irudhi Suttru (2016), being made in three different languages. Many of their following films, Pushkar–Gayathr's crime drama Vikram Vedha (2017), Prasann's comedy-drama Shubh Mangal Saavdhan (2017), C. S. Amudhan's Tamizh Padam 2 (2018) and Ashwin Saravana's psychological thriller Game Over (2019) were commercial successes. History [ edit ] 2010–2015 [ edit ] YNOT Studios was created by Chennai-based architect and entrepreneur S. Sashikanth in 2009. Having previously worked in films as an assistant art director, Sashikanth remained in contact with film personalities through his architectural work and became a close acquaintance of ad filmmaker C. S. Amudhan and cinematographer Nirav Shah . Looking to make his directorial debut, Amudhan pitched film scripts in three genres for YNOT Studios: a road film, a period film and a spoof film, with the latter, later materialising as the studi's first film, Thamizh Padam (2010), Tamil cinem's first spoof film.   Featuring a relatively new technical crew and a rookie cast led by Shiva , Sashikanth opted to sell the film to Dayanidhi Azhagiri's Cloud Nine Movies to ensure it received a wide release. Told in satirical fashion spoofing popular Tamil films and celebrities, the film narrated the tale of a young man looking to reunite with his long-lost family while tackling the criminalities of a notorious gangster. Upon release, the film received critical acclaim en route to becoming one of the box office successes of the year in Tamil Nadu . Rediff.com called the film a "must watch", while Sify.com labelled the film as a "rollicking comedy" and gave particular praise for Shiv's performance and the directo's script and dialogues.   The studi's next film, Va (2010) by director duo Pushkar–Gayathri , earned positive reviews but did not perform well at the box office. Telling the tale of a man hunting for liquor on a dry day in Chennai before leaving to Saudi Arabia, the film was completely shot within the city and was again distributed with the assistance of Cloud Nine Movies.   The studio next produced Balaji Mohan's Kadhalil Sodhappuvadhu Yeppadi (2012), which was simultaneously made in Telugu as Love Failure (2012), and both films opened to critical and commercial acclaim.  After being impressed with a short film version released on YouTube by Balaji, Sashikanth approached him and opted to co-produce a full-length feature of the script along with the fil's lead actor Siddharth .   In their review of the film, Rediff.com praised the tea's innovative style of film-making noting that "the story is told in a slightly new format" and that "the script is simple yet meaningful".  The success of their first collaboration prompted YNOT Studios to produce Balaj's next bilingual project, the comedy-drama Vaayai Moodi Pesavum (2014) starring Dulquer Salmaan and Nazriya , which was shot in Tamil and Malayalam. The film narrated the tale of a fictional hill station that is hit with a virus that causes people to lose the power of speech, with the second half of the film being predominantly a silent film .  The film also opened to positive reviews, with a critic from Rediff.com writing it was "a totally new concept coupled with the director’s unique narrative style and a screenplay loaded with satire and comedy, that makes Vaayai Moodi Pesavum , a thought-provoking and thoroughly enjoyable film", concluding it was "definitely a must watch".   After the release of the film, Behindwoods.com remarked that YNOT Studios regularly "associated themselves with gutsy new-wave cinema".  The compan's next release was Vasanthabalan's historical drama Kaaviya Thalaivan (2014), which narrated the tale of two stage actors who compete for roles, love, and the future of India during its quest for independence . Starring Prithviraj Sukumaran and Siddharth , with music composed by A. R. Rahman , it became YNOT Studio' biggest production to date. Kaaviya Thalaivan was announced in September 2012 and research work for the final script was carried out for nearly a year wherein facts, references and whereabouts were collected from veteran theatre artists across Tamil Nadu. Vasanthabalan was inspired to write the fil's script after discovering more about Tamil stage actors from the 1930s and adapted real-life events from the lives of T. K. Shanmugam , K. B. Sundarambal , and S. G. Kittappa . Filming took a further year before it had a theatrical release in November 2014.  Despite opening to positive reviews and winning critical acclaim, it performed poorly at the box office, with trade pundits blaming the time of release. Notwithstanding its relatively modest commercial performance, the film later won ten Tamil Nadu State Film Awards for 2014, including awards for Best Actor, Best Music Director and Best Cinematography.   2016–2019 [ edit ] From 2016 onwards, YNOT Studios continued to contribute towards making "new wave films" in the Tamil film industry and experienced commercial success. The company collaborated with the director Sudha Kongara , actor Madhavan , and debutante actress Ritika Singh to produce a bilingual sports drama film titled Irudhi Suttru (2016) in Tamil and Saala Khadoos (2016) in Hindi, which told the story of a boorish boxing coach taking on a rebellious young woman from a fishermen colony as his new student.  With a publicity budget of 9 crore rupees, the promotions for the films were described by The Hindu to be "unlike other film promotions in the South", considering that most film teams in the Tamil film industry do not usually tour around the state publicising their project.  Before the release of the film, the team held several screenings to select Hindi and Tamil audiences and edited the film accordingly to the taste of the audiences.  Irudhi Suttru opened to positive reviews, with a critic from Sify .com stating that the film was "a perfect sports drama, which should not be missed" and added that "this inspirational effort has a superb screenplay with all the typical elements of a good sports film in place", while Rediff.com agreed that the film was "not to be missed", adding "its refreshing characters, enjoyable plot, great music and visuals keeps you hooked".   Following the success of the film, Sudha Kongara remade the film in the Telugu language as Guru (2017) with Venkatesh in the lead role alongside Ritika Singh.  Irudhi Suttru was later screened at the 29th Tokyo International Film Festival during October 2016 and was then also selected to be a part of the Indian Panorama section at 47th International Film Festival of India. It went on to win a National Film Award for Ritika Singh; three Filmfare Awards for Best Director, Actor and Actress; as well as Best Picture at the South Indian International Movie Awards and the IIFA Utsavam .   YNOT Studio' next release was the crime drama Vikram Vedha (2017), where they collaborated again with duo Pushkar–Gayathri . Having been in talks with the duo since their previous joint venture in 2010, Sashikanth confirmed that pre-production work was ongoing by early 2015 and revealed that the film would tell the tale of an encounter cop and his pursuit of a gangster.   The directors revealed that the story for the film was inspired by the Indian meta-folktale Baital Pachisi ( Vedhala Kadhai in Tamil), with the characterisation of King Vikramadithyan and the celestial spirit Vedhalam derived from that plot.    Actors Madhavan and Vijay Sethupathi were signed to portray titular characters, with filming beginning in November 2016 and progressing for five months.   Vikram Vedha opened to positive reviews from critics and audiences, with critic Manoj Kumar of The Indian Express labelling it as "by far the best film to release in Tamil this year so far" adding readers "not to miss the film".   The Hindustan Times's Karthik Kumar called it "a film to remember", "a must watch" and "path-breaking", while adding "not only is the film entertaining from start to finish, it’s equally engaging and it succeeds in piquing the intellect of audiences like no recent Tamil film".  The film was a commercial success, becoming the second highest grossing Tamil film of the year after Baahubali 2 (2017) at the time of its release.  Made at a budget of 11 crore rupees, the film grossed ten crores in Tamil Nadu alone within the first weekend, earning seventeen crores worldwide.  Within a week of its release, the film had grossed over forty crores worldwide and performed especially well in the United States.    YNOT Studios achieved further commercial success with R. S. Prasanna's Hindi comedy-drama Shubh Mangal Saavdhan (2017), which was co-produced in association with Colour Yellow Productions and Eros International . A remake of the successful Tamil film Kalyana Samayal Saadham (2013), the film narrates the story of an arranged marriage which becomes threatened by the groo's potential erectile dysfunction and stars Ayushmann Khurrana and Bhumi Pednekar . The company had earlier planned to produce the film in Hindi during 2014 with Thirukumaran Entertainment and Abi & Abi Pictures, but problems with casting meant that production was postponed and the film was later sold to different production houses.  The film opened in September 2017. Critics praised the screenwriting and the approach the filmmaker took in subtly narrating a taboo subject with humour.   At the box office, the film outperformed other high-profile films released during the same period.  In late July 2017, YNOT Studios announced that they had begun production work on Tamizh Padam 2 by C. S. Amudhan , which would be a sequel to their first production. Sashikanth had requested Amudhan to work on the film during November 2016, following which the director completed the scripting process.   The film opened to positive response and was a commercially successful venture. Their next project titled Game Over , starred Taapsee Pannu , for whose the film marked the acto's return to Tamil cinema after four years.  Directed by Ashwin Saravanan, the film opened to rave reviews and also achieved commercial success.  2020–present [ edit ] As the company approached its tenth anniversary, YNOT Studios announced a collaboration with Reliance Entertainment to co-produce several of their upcoming projects and further announced their subsidiaries: its distribution arm, YNOT X and the music label YNOT Music.  Since 2020, the company has regularly alternated between producing high-budget projects featuring leading actors and technical crew, and making small-budget content-driven films featuring relative newcomers. The studio produced the crime drama Jagame Thandhiram (2021) directed by Karthik Subbaraj , with the shoot primarily taking place across the United Kingdom . Featuring Dhanush and James Cosmo in leading roles, the film narrated the tale of a carefree gangster in Madurai who is recruited to help an overseas crime lord take down a rival. The fil's release was delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic , before Sashikanth opted in favour of a direct-to-digital release through the streaming platform Netflix .   In a further large-budget venture, YNOT Studios collaborated with Pushkar–Gayathri to remake the du's 2017 Tamil film into Hindi with the same title of Vikram Vedha (2022). Featuring an ensemble cast led by Hrithik Roshan , Saif Ali Khan and Radhika Apte , the film recorded one of the widest releases for a Hindi film of all time.  The film opened to positive reviews from critics and audiences in September 2022.   In the early 2020s, YNOT Studios simultaneously worked on producing a number of smaller ventures with "off-beat" scripts including Halitha Shameem's Aelay (2021), Madonne Ashwi's Mandela (2021), Nishanth Kalidind's Kadaseela Biriyani (2021) and Jayaprakash Radhakrishnan's Thalaikoothal (2023).   All four films opened to positive reviews from critics,    with Mandela proceeding to win two National Film Awards and several Best Film nominations at award ceremonies.  Filmography [ edit ] Production [ edit ] Distribution [ edit ] In addition to the production of films since 2010, YNOT Studios has also been involved in distributing films of other production houses and notably was involved in the theatrical release of Enakkul Oruvan (2015).  The below is a list of films from other production houses distributed by the studio and its subsidiary: Films distributed under YNOT Studios Enakkul Oruvan (2015) Films distributed under YNOTX Marketing & Distribution Super Deluxe (2019) Pakkiri (2019) K.D. (2019) Jada (2019) Vaanam Kottattum (2020) Kadaseela Biriyani (2021) 83 (2021) Music [ edit ] In late 2019, YNOT Studios set up a second subsidiary, YNOT Music , to oversee the release of soundtracks from films. In December 2019, the studio launched the original soundtrack to the film Game Over composed by Ron Ethan Yohann .

Welcome to Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit . 6,849,038 articles in English From toda's featured article DeLancey W. Gill (1859–1940) was an American drafter , landscape painter , and photographer. As a teenager, he moved in with an aunt in Washington, D.C. , after his mother and stepfather traveled west. He eventually found himself employed as an architectural draftsman for the Treasury . He created sketches and watercolor paintings of the city, with a particular focus on the still-undeveloped rural and poorer areas of the district. While working as an illustrator for the Smithsonian's Bureau of American Ethnology in the 1890s, he was appointed as the agenc's photographer without prior photographic training. He took portrait photographs that circulated widely of thousands of Native American delegates to Washington, including notable figures such as Chief Joseph and Geronimo . These photographs have come under modern criticism for his frequent use of props and clothing, sometimes outdated or inauthentic, given to the delegates. ( Full article... ) Recently featured: Oceanic whitetip shark RoboCop Tales of Monkey Island Archive By email More featured articles About Did you know ... Yevhen Klopotenko ... that Yevhen Klopotenko (pictured) fought a "war for borscht "? ... that a street in San Francisco was named after a man who used a false identity ? ... that Alfie Templeman described the style of his studio album Radiosoul as "incohesively cohesive"? ... that Rosemary Miller won her stat's skeet shooting championship one year after learning the sport, and then won a state shooting championship in all but two years for the rest of her life? ... that the Japanese boy band Nexz was created through the program Nizi Project season 2 ? ... that the Nazi collaborator Sebastiaan de Ranitz abandoned his office following Mad Tuesday , leaving his department in turmoil? ... that Gedling Town F.C.'s nickname "The Ferrymen" was inspired by the name of a pub located next to the tea's stadium? ... that Antonio Dini was the only survivor of a three-man crew after he crashed a plane into the sea, but had no recollection of the crash due to concussion? ... that after a pigeon sculpture in Wellington went missing, members of the public created a memorial for it? Archive Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Keir Starmer The New Popular Front wins the most seats in the National Assembly in the French legislative election but does not achieve a majority . The Labour Party wins the United Kingdom general election and Keir Starmer (pictured) becomes prime minister. Hurricane Beryl , the earliest-recorded Category 5 Atlantic hurricane in a calendar year, leaves at least 15 people dead in the Caribbean , Venezuela, and the United States. In the Netherlands, a new cabinet is sworn in, with Dick Schoof serving as the prime minister . Ongoing : Israel–Hamas war timeline Russian invasion of Ukraine timeline Sudanese civil war timeline Recent deaths : Jane McAlevey Rick Cluff Martti Wallén Audrey Flack Ismail Kadare Hugh Aldons Nominate an article On this day July 10 : Independence Day in the Bahamas ( 1973 ) Martin Luther King Jr. 1645 – English Civil War : The Parliamentarians destroyed the last Royalist field army at the Battle of Langport , ultimately giving Parliament control of the west of England. 1942 – An American naval aviator discovered a downed Japanese Mitsubishi A6M Zero on Akutan Island , Alaska, which was later rebuilt and flown to devise tactics against the aircraft during World War II. 1966 – Martin Luther King Jr. (pictured) led a rally in support of the Chicago Freedom Movement , one of the most ambitious civil-rights campaigns in the northern United States. 1999 – The United States defeated China in the final match of the third FIFA Wome's World Cup , setting records in both attendance and television ratings for wome's sports. 2006 – Typhoon Ewiniar made landfall in South Korea, causing damages across the country amounting to 2.06 trillion won (US$1.4 billion). Arthur Annesley, 1st Earl of Anglesey ( b. 1614) Eva Ekeblad ( b. 1724) Bobo Brazil ( b. 1924) Calogero Vizzini ( d. 1954) More anniversaries: July 9 July 10 July 11 Archive By email List of days of the year Toda's featured picture Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – The central hub for editors, with resources, links, tasks, and announcements. Village pump – Forum for discussions about Wikipedia itself, including policies and technical issues. Site news – Sources of news about Wikipedia and the broader Wikimedia movement. Teahouse – Ask basic questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Help desk – Ask questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Reference desk – Ask research questions about encyclopedic topics. Content portals – A unique way to navigate the encyclopedia. Wikipedi's sister projects Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation , a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects : Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning tools Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English . Many other Wikipedias are available ; some of the largest are listed below. 1,000,000+ articles العربية مصرى Deutsch Español فارسی ‎ Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 250,000+ articles Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gú Български Català Čeština Dansk Esperanto Euskara עברית Հայերեն 한국어 Magyar Norsk bokmål Română Simple English Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча 50,000+ articles Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bosanski کوردی Eesti Ελληνικά Frysk Gaeilge Galego Hrvatski ქართული Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių മലയാളം Македонски မြန်မာဘာသာ Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina ไทย తెలుగు اردو Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=1225315602 "

Welcome to Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit . 6,849,038 articles in English From toda's featured article DeLancey W. Gill (1859–1940) was an American drafter , landscape painter , and photographer. As a teenager, he moved in with an aunt in Washington, D.C. , after his mother and stepfather traveled west. He eventually found himself employed as an architectural draftsman for the Treasury . He created sketches and watercolor paintings of the city, with a particular focus on the still-undeveloped rural and poorer areas of the district. While working as an illustrator for the Smithsonian's Bureau of American Ethnology in the 1890s, he was appointed as the agenc's photographer without prior photographic training. He took portrait photographs that circulated widely of thousands of Native American delegates to Washington, including notable figures such as Chief Joseph and Geronimo . These photographs have come under modern criticism for his frequent use of props and clothing, sometimes outdated or inauthentic, given to the delegates. ( Full article... ) Recently featured: Oceanic whitetip shark RoboCop Tales of Monkey Island Archive By email More featured articles About Did you know ... Yevhen Klopotenko ... that Yevhen Klopotenko (pictured) fought a "war for borscht "? ... that a street in San Francisco was named after a man who used a false identity ? ... that Alfie Templeman described the style of his studio album Radiosoul as "incohesively cohesive"? ... that Rosemary Miller won her stat's skeet shooting championship one year after learning the sport, and then won a state shooting championship in all but two years for the rest of her life? ... that the Japanese boy band Nexz was created through the program Nizi Project season 2 ? ... that the Nazi collaborator Sebastiaan de Ranitz abandoned his office following Mad Tuesday , leaving his department in turmoil? ... that Gedling Town F.C.'s nickname "The Ferrymen" was inspired by the name of a pub located next to the tea's stadium? ... that Antonio Dini was the only survivor of a three-man crew after he crashed a plane into the sea, but had no recollection of the crash due to concussion? ... that after a pigeon sculpture in Wellington went missing, members of the public created a memorial for it? Archive Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Keir Starmer The New Popular Front wins the most seats in the National Assembly in the French legislative election but does not achieve a majority . The Labour Party wins the United Kingdom general election and Keir Starmer (pictured) becomes prime minister. Hurricane Beryl , the earliest-recorded Category 5 Atlantic hurricane in a calendar year, leaves at least 15 people dead in the Caribbean , Venezuela, and the United States. In the Netherlands, a new cabinet is sworn in, with Dick Schoof serving as the prime minister . Ongoing : Israel–Hamas war timeline Russian invasion of Ukraine timeline Sudanese civil war timeline Recent deaths : Jane McAlevey Rick Cluff Martti Wallén Audrey Flack Ismail Kadare Hugh Aldons Nominate an article On this day July 10 : Independence Day in the Bahamas ( 1973 ) Martin Luther King Jr. 1645 – English Civil War : The Parliamentarians destroyed the last Royalist field army at the Battle of Langport , ultimately giving Parliament control of the west of England. 1942 – An American naval aviator discovered a downed Japanese Mitsubishi A6M Zero on Akutan Island , Alaska, which was later rebuilt and flown to devise tactics against the aircraft during World War II. 1966 – Martin Luther King Jr. (pictured) led a rally in support of the Chicago Freedom Movement , one of the most ambitious civil-rights campaigns in the northern United States. 1999 – The United States defeated China in the final match of the third FIFA Wome's World Cup , setting records in both attendance and television ratings for wome's sports. 2006 – Typhoon Ewiniar made landfall in South Korea, causing damages across the country amounting to 2.06 trillion won (US$1.4 billion). Arthur Annesley, 1st Earl of Anglesey ( b. 1614) Eva Ekeblad ( b. 1724) Bobo Brazil ( b. 1924) Calogero Vizzini ( d. 1954) More anniversaries: July 9 July 10 July 11 Archive By email List of days of the year Toda's featured picture Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – The central hub for editors, with resources, links, tasks, and announcements. Village pump – Forum for discussions about Wikipedia itself, including policies and technical issues. Site news – Sources of news about Wikipedia and the broader Wikimedia movement. Teahouse – Ask basic questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Help desk – Ask questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Reference desk – Ask research questions about encyclopedic topics. Content portals – A unique way to navigate the encyclopedia. Wikipedi's sister projects Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation , a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects : Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning tools Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English . Many other Wikipedias are available ; some of the largest are listed below. 1,000,000+ articles العربية مصرى Deutsch Español فارسی ‎ Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 250,000+ articles Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gú Български Català Čeština Dansk Esperanto Euskara עברית Հայերեն 한국어 Magyar Norsk bokmål Română Simple English Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча 50,000+ articles Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bosanski کوردی Eesti Ελληνικά Frysk Gaeilge Galego Hrvatski ქართული Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių മലയാളം Македонски မြန်မာဘာသာ Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina ไทย తెలుగు اردو Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=1225315602 "

2024 Indian film by Vineeth Sreenivasan Varshangalkku Shesham ( transl. Years later ) is a 2024 Indian Malayalam -language coming-of-age comedy drama film,written and directed by Vineeth Sreenivasan . It was produced and distributed by Visakh Subramaniam of Merryland Cinemas . The film stars Pranav Mohanlal and Dhyan Sreenivasan in the lead roles, along with Nivin Pauly , Kalyani Priyadarshan , Y. G. Mahendran , Shaan Rahman , Neeta Pillai , Aju Varghese , Basil Joseph , Neeraj Madhav , and Vineeth Sreenivasan himself in supporting roles. The fil's original songs and background score were composed by debutant Amrit Ramnath. The fil's principal photography took place between October and December 2023, lasting 40 days. It was filmed across 50 locations in Kerala and Tamil Nadu . Viswajith Odukkathil and Ranjan Abraham handled the cinematography and editing, respectively. It was released worldwide in theatres on 11 April 2024 to mixed-to-negative reviews from critics and audiences, alike. The performances of Dhyan and Nivin, production design, soundtrack, and cinematography were praised. However, the performances of Pranav and Kalyani, screenplay, cringe elements, pacing and runtime received criticism. Despite, the film became a major commercial success, grossing over ₹80 crores at the worldwide box-office.   Plot [ edit ] In the early 1970s, Venu is a high schooler who devotes all of his time to helping out in traveling plays as they stop in his hometown. One night, the producer of a play asks him to bring an instrumentalist , Murali, from the house of the local landlord. Drunk, Murali reluctantly agrees to play for the evening. Venu is thoroughly impressed with the ma's spontaneous musicality and they quickly become friends. As time passes, Venu goes to college; Murali shows up there one day, trying to meet the principal to borrow a new book that has reached the college library . Venu offers to help and discovers that the book has already been lent to a first-year student named Annie. Murali, on meeting Annie, instantly falls in love with her. They meet that night to exchange the book and continue seeing each other. Murali asks her out, but is met with shock and rejection. She tells him to leave, also revealing that she is sexually involved with her brother-in-law due to his compulsion. Murali is shattered by the news and disappears for a while. One day, he writes to Venu that he is leaving for Madras with the intention of making it in cinema; Venu joins him as well. They rent out a room in Kodambakkam where Murali lands a job as a violinist under music director Indhra Dhanush. After playing the violin for a B-movie, Murali meets the producer of the film, Keshavadev. He tells him that his film will flop massively. Embarrassed, he returns to meet him after it rightly fails. Murali introduces him to Venu, who has the script for a prospective film. He is impressed and agrees to produce it. Venu insists that Murali produce the music for it, but he refuses, citing his inexperience. Murali secretly passes on some of his music to Indhra Dhanush, who goes on to compose music for the film. The film, upon release, becomes a huge success, with the song that Murali actually composed becoming a sensation. He is driven mad by the fact that he did not produce the music himself. He meets Indhra Dhanush, asking in vain that he at least tell Venu that it was his music. Venu eventually discovers the original cassette with the words "Murali" on it, containing his fil's music. He tries to meet Murali, discovering that he has left Madras . Then Murali goes to Bombay where he works as a music teacher in a school.Fall in love with Bhumi working in the same school. Both Bhumi and Murali eventually fall in love. But at some point both of them get misunderstanding and their love breaks up. But left Bombay after the 1993 Serial Blasts Over the years, Venu directs many more films and falls out of the cinema industry. He meets Murali again who says that he should return to the film industry. He hesitatingly agrees, and they discover the young director Pradeep. Venu and Pradeep start looking for the crew to work on one of Ven's old scripts, Jeevithagadhakale . They finalise on a cast of mostly new artists except for the eccentric actor, Nithin Molly. At the end of filming, their producer, Jayan, who is Keshavde's son, falls seriously ill and is unable to continue bankrolling the film. Murali, disappointed, disappears again. They are miraculously saved by paparazzi who film Nithin Molly in an inebriated state, making him popular and creating hype for the film. Jeevithagadhakale releases theatrically to outstanding reactions and reviews. Venu hires a taxi to a location in Tamil Nadu where they meet Senthil, an old friend from their lodge in Madras. He directs them to Karpagam, a village near Salem , where Murali is living in a Carnatic music sabha. Venu tells him that their first movie as a duo has released, to his delight. They go to a theatre in Coimbatore to see how the audience reacts to their film. Cast [ edit ] Pranav Mohanlal as Murali Vishwambaran Dhyan Sreenivasan as Venu Koothuparambu Kalyani Priyadarshan as Annie, Mural's ex-girlfriend (voiceovers by Raveena Ravi ) Sai Aadya Bhumi as Bhumi, Mural's 2nd ex-girlfriend and Bombay music teacher Neeta Pillai as actress Radhika, Ven's wife Vineeth Sreenivasan as Ven's taxi driver Asif Ali as John, Anni's husband (cameo) Aju Varghese in a dual role as: Producer Kamukara Keshavadev Jayan Keshavadev, Keshavade's son Nivin Pauly as Nithin Mulanthuruthy a.k.a. Nithin Molly (extended cameo appearance) Basil Joseph as Pradeep, an assistant director Neeraj Madhav as producer'Fearles' Alex Mathew (cameo) Shaan Rahman as actor Kamraj Y. G. Mahendran as Swaminathan, Swam's lodge owner Kalesh Ramanand as music director Indradhanush "Indra" Production [ edit ] Development [ edit ] On 13 July 2023, Vineeth Sreenivasan announced his collaboration once again with producer Visakh Subramaniam of Merryland Cinemas , following the success of Hridayam (2022), for their second project together, titled Varshangalkku Shesham . The film also brings back Pranav Mohanlal and Kalyani Priyadarshan from their previous film.  Vineeth described that the film will revolve around a bunch of friends.  In an interview, talking about his influences, Vineeth recalled how he listened to his father Sreenivasan's stories about his early life in Madras and also the experiences of his contemporaries in the film industry. During his school days, Vineeth avidly read popular Malayalam film magazines , such as Nana , Vellinakshatram , and Chithrabhumi , which featured articles and interviews with those working in cinema. These stories, along with the imagined picture of Madras they presented, served as inspirations for Varshangalkku Shesham . He also recalled how, during stage shows, actors Mukesh and Innocent would entertain the team with anecdotes from their lives in Madras and their experiences in the cinema world. Vineeth himself being a resident of Chennai (formerly Madras), describes the city as "a place that had always fascinated" him. Varshangalkku Shesham features Madras in the 1970s and 1980s, spanning 50 years from early 1970s, showcasing the evolution of the film industry during this period; the film "attempts to showcase that arc of time, the mood and the style of working".  Vineeth had the story in mind since his college days but lacked confidence to execute it. After Hridayam , he gained confidence to make it into fruition. He began screenwriting in 2022.  Vineeth revealed that the story of Varshangalkku Shesham was inspired by two screenplays written by Sreenivasan.  Vineeth also integrated some inputs from director Priyadarshan , to whom he shared the screenplay. Priyadarshan narrated an incident that occurred in a film studio, which Vineeth incorporated into the film.  Casting [ edit ] During the fil's announcement, the initial cast included Pranav Mohanlal , Dhyan Sreenivasan , Aju Varghese , Kalyani Priyadarshan , Basil Joseph , Vineeth, Neeraj Madhav , Neeta Pillai , Sai Aadya Bhumi , Arjun Lal, Nikhil Nair, Shaan Rahman , and Nivin Pauly .   Further cast members were revealed in the fil's teaser, with Y. G. Mahendran , Harikrishnan , Anjali Nair , Darshana Sudarshanan, Deepak Parambol , Bhagath Manuel , Ashwath Lal, Sreeram Ramachandran , Krishnachandran , TSR among others appear in supporting roles.  Vineeth had Pranav, Dhyan, and Nivin in mind during the scripting phase itself.  According to Vineeth, the film will not work without the three. About Kalyan's casting, he said: "Everyone suggested Kalyani after listening to the story".  Vineeth based Prana's character after actor Murali , whom he observed during the filming of Champakulam Thachan (1992). He recalls seeing Murali walking towards their hotel from a distance, dressed in a jubba and mundu , with a sling bag on his shoulder, while singing a poem. Vineeth described the characterisation as "a man flowing in the wind". He also named the character after the actor.  The film marks the reunion of Pranav and Kalyani with Vineeth after Hridayam .  Vineeth collaborates with Nivin after an eight-year hiatus. According to Vineeth, his character drives the story forward once he is introduced, with Vineeth noting that Nivin was in his "best form".   Dhyan underwent a weight loss of 12 kilograms to prepare for his role in the film.  Shaan, who previously collaborated with Vineeth as a music director in his earlier projects, made his acting debut with Varshangalkku Shesham .  Although Vineeth had previously approached Shaan for a brief role in Thira (2013), he declined it. However, he accepted this offer, influenced by Vineet's confidence in him. Shaan underwent a makeover, donning an outfit, wig, and mustache for his role.  Vineeth had approached director Lokesh Kanagaraj for a role as he wanted a "Tamil-speaking actor with a calm demeanor", but Kanagaraj declined it due to his directorial commitments. Consequently, Kalesh Ramanand, who had previously appeared in Hridayam , was chosen for the role, as suggested by Visakh.   Vineeth reminisced about how several actors in the film juggled shooting dates with multiple filmmakers, unlike in Hridayam , where most of them were early in their careers. He described it as "a wonderful coincidence that we were able to bring them all together for this film".  Filming [ edit ] Principal photography began on 26 October 2023. The following day, filming was relocated to Aroor .  The fil's art director, Nimesh Thanur, constructed sets at Aroor, replicating Kodambakkam and film studios of Madras . Additionally, some old studio scenes were shot in Coimbatore and Pollachi .  It took two months to build the sets.  Vineeth said that director Priyadarshan had provided some important details in the design of Swam's Lodge, one of the major backdrops of the film, when he narrated the screenplay to him.   The first filming schedule was concluded in the fourth week of November after 23 days shooting.  Nivin joined the film for the second schedule in Munnar in early December.  The entire filming process wrapped up on 20 December 2023.  The film was shot over a span of 40 days across more than 50 locations, involving over 200 crew members.  Although the film depicts Chennai in the 1970s and 1980s, it was not shot in Chennai.  Post-production [ edit ] Dubbing for the film commenced in early January 2024 in Chennai .  The dubbing process was completed on the same month.   It was followed by the final stage of editing in that month.  The audio mixing of the film had been completed by March 2024.   Music [ edit ] Varshangalkku Shesham marks the debut feature film composition work of Amrit Ramnath, son of singer-composer Bombay Jayashri . He was until then composing independent tracks for some years.  Ramnath started composing for the film while he was at the hospital where his mother was admitted and composed three tracks during the period.  Manu Manjith , Vaisakh Sugunan, Jayashri, and Sreenivasan wrote the lyrics.  Think Music released the fil's soundtrack album on 7 April 2024 which consisted of 14 songs.  Release [ edit ] Theatrical [ edit ] Varshangalkku Shesham was theatrically released worldwide on 11 April 2024 during the Ramadan and Vishu weekend, along with Aavesham and Jai Ganesh .  The date was announced through a first-look poster released by director Karan Johar in December 2023.   Distribution [ edit ] The film was distributed by the production company Merryland Cinemas in Kerala, while Phars Film acquired the distribution rights in overseas territories.   Sakthi Film Factory acquired the theatrical rights for film distribution across Tamil Nadu.  Home media [ edit ] The film starting streaming on SonyLIV from 7 June 2024. Reception [ edit ] Critical reception [ edit ] Varshangallku Shesham received mixed reviews from critics as well as audience upon release.  Divya Nair of Rediff.com rated 3/5 stars and stated "Vineeth Sreenivasan deserves applause for striving to blend the past with the present and revoking your memories."  Writing for the The Times of India , Anna Mathews praised the performances of Nivin Pauly and Basil Joseph.  Writing for Hindustan Times , Latha Srinivasan praised the performances of the cast and Vineeth Srinivasa's direction as earnest, but felt the film was lengthy and melodramatic.  Cris of The News Minute praised the film as an ode to cinema and friendship.  Anandu Suresh of The Indian Express , however, criticised the fil's writing and Pranav Mohanla's acting, yet commended Nivin Paul's performance.  Box office [ edit ] The film grossed over ₹80 crore in its theatrical run.

Malayalam film production studio Merryland Studio is an Indian film studio based in Thiruvananthapuram , Kerala . It was the second film studio in Kerala, established in 1950 by former Trivandrum mayor and businessman P. Subramaniam . He produced 70 films, 59 of them directed by himself. He was active between 1951 – 1979. The studi's home productions were made under the company Neela Productions . Merryland Studio was famous for their professional rivalry with Kunchacko's Udaya Studio , the first film studio in Kerala. They resumed film production under the newly christened company Merryland Cinemas , debuting with Hridayam (2022). History [ edit ] When cinema became a passion, Subramaniam decided to buy some property to begin a studio complex. He bought land at Nemom , Thiruvananthapuram , and founded the studio in 1951, with two floors and a single camera. The first production, Atma Sakhi (1952), was given a lukewarm reception by viewers. It was the comedy film Avakashikal that put Merryland on the success chart. Mantravadi (1957)  was the first film that made Subramaniam a director. He went on to direct 59 films, out of the 69 films produced by Merryland. The list includes a string of landmark films of Malayalam cinema history.  In the 1950s, Malayalam film production were shuttling between Madras and Udaya Studio in Alappuzha . It was at that time Merryland Studio was set up at a five-and-a-half acres of land, easing the productions of Malayalam films. At its peak time, the studio used to employ close to 80 personnel. Many of the actors and actresses frequently appeared in Merryland films: Prem Nazir acted in at least 30 films in the first 10 years of his career, Sathyan was introduced in Merrylan's debut film Atmasakhi , Madhu who appeared in many films was also a family friend of theirs, K. V. Shanthi was also known by the name "Merryland Shanthi" for her long-term association with the studio, the trio Travancore sisters also closely associated with the studio, Sharada also worked in many of the films. Others who were introduced through Neela Production' films are Kottarakkara Sreedharan Nair , Miss Kumari , Vinodini Sasimohan , Srividya , Aranmula Ponnamma , S. P. Pillai among others. The competition between Udaya Studio and Merryland Studio was so intense that at one point when Merryland released Bhaktha Kuchela , Udaya released Krishna Kuchela with the same story, after that one they decided to stop the practice. Their Kumarasambhavam won the first Kerala State Film Award for Best Film when it was established in 1969. Merrylan's films revolved around either social issues or mythology, they were mostly known for mythological films which were the most successful.  Bhakta Kuchela , Sree Guruvayoorappan , Swami Ayyappan , and Sree Murukan were among their most successful mythological films.  Hridayathinte Nirangal was the last movie to come out of Merryland.  Subramaniam died in 1979, and it spelt the death knell of Merryland Studio as a powerhouse of Malayalam Cinema.         In 2021, screenwriter John Paul wrote in an article that " The studios set up by P. Subramaniam and Kunchacko—Merryland and Udaya—respectively, led to the development of a full-fledged Malayalam film industry ".  In 2022, Merryland Studios resumed film production under the newly christened company Merryland Cinemas , debuting with Hridayam (2022)  Films [ edit ] Under Neela Productions [ edit ] Under Merryland Cinemas [ edit ] Television [ edit ] The following serials are produced by Karthikeyan, Murugan and Saranya Subramaniam under the banner of Merryland, Sree Subramaniam Enterprises, Sree Saravana Enterprises and Sree Saran Creations. All TV series are in Malayalam.

Welcome to Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit . 6,849,038 articles in English From toda's featured article DeLancey W. Gill (1859–1940) was an American drafter , landscape painter , and photographer. As a teenager, he moved in with an aunt in Washington, D.C. , after his mother and stepfather traveled west. He eventually found himself employed as an architectural draftsman for the Treasury . He created sketches and watercolor paintings of the city, with a particular focus on the still-undeveloped rural and poorer areas of the district. While working as an illustrator for the Smithsonian's Bureau of American Ethnology in the 1890s, he was appointed as the agenc's photographer without prior photographic training. He took portrait photographs that circulated widely of thousands of Native American delegates to Washington, including notable figures such as Chief Joseph and Geronimo . These photographs have come under modern criticism for his frequent use of props and clothing, sometimes outdated or inauthentic, given to the delegates. ( Full article... ) Recently featured: Oceanic whitetip shark RoboCop Tales of Monkey Island Archive By email More featured articles About Did you know ... Yevhen Klopotenko ... that Yevhen Klopotenko (pictured) fought a "war for borscht "? ... that a street in San Francisco was named after a man who used a false identity ? ... that Alfie Templeman described the style of his studio album Radiosoul as "incohesively cohesive"? ... that Rosemary Miller won her stat's skeet shooting championship one year after learning the sport, and then won a state shooting championship in all but two years for the rest of her life? ... that the Japanese boy band Nexz was created through the program Nizi Project season 2 ? ... that the Nazi collaborator Sebastiaan de Ranitz abandoned his office following Mad Tuesday , leaving his department in turmoil? ... that Gedling Town F.C.'s nickname "The Ferrymen" was inspired by the name of a pub located next to the tea's stadium? ... that Antonio Dini was the only survivor of a three-man crew after he crashed a plane into the sea, but had no recollection of the crash due to concussion? ... that after a pigeon sculpture in Wellington went missing, members of the public created a memorial for it? Archive Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Keir Starmer The New Popular Front wins the most seats in the National Assembly in the French legislative election but does not achieve a majority . The Labour Party wins the United Kingdom general election and Keir Starmer (pictured) becomes prime minister. Hurricane Beryl , the earliest-recorded Category 5 Atlantic hurricane in a calendar year, leaves at least 15 people dead in the Caribbean , Venezuela, and the United States. In the Netherlands, a new cabinet is sworn in, with Dick Schoof serving as the prime minister . Ongoing : Israel–Hamas war timeline Russian invasion of Ukraine timeline Sudanese civil war timeline Recent deaths : Jane McAlevey Rick Cluff Martti Wallén Audrey Flack Ismail Kadare Hugh Aldons Nominate an article On this day July 10 : Independence Day in the Bahamas ( 1973 ) Martin Luther King Jr. 1645 – English Civil War : The Parliamentarians destroyed the last Royalist field army at the Battle of Langport , ultimately giving Parliament control of the west of England. 1942 – An American naval aviator discovered a downed Japanese Mitsubishi A6M Zero on Akutan Island , Alaska, which was later rebuilt and flown to devise tactics against the aircraft during World War II. 1966 – Martin Luther King Jr. (pictured) led a rally in support of the Chicago Freedom Movement , one of the most ambitious civil-rights campaigns in the northern United States. 1999 – The United States defeated China in the final match of the third FIFA Wome's World Cup , setting records in both attendance and television ratings for wome's sports. 2006 – Typhoon Ewiniar made landfall in South Korea, causing damages across the country amounting to 2.06 trillion won (US$1.4 billion). Arthur Annesley, 1st Earl of Anglesey ( b. 1614) Eva Ekeblad ( b. 1724) Bobo Brazil ( b. 1924) Calogero Vizzini ( d. 1954) More anniversaries: July 9 July 10 July 11 Archive By email List of days of the year Toda's featured picture Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – The central hub for editors, with resources, links, tasks, and announcements. Village pump – Forum for discussions about Wikipedia itself, including policies and technical issues. Site news – Sources of news about Wikipedia and the broader Wikimedia movement. Teahouse – Ask basic questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Help desk – Ask questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Reference desk – Ask research questions about encyclopedic topics. Content portals – A unique way to navigate the encyclopedia. Wikipedi's sister projects Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation , a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects : Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning tools Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English . Many other Wikipedias are available ; some of the largest are listed below. 1,000,000+ articles العربية مصرى Deutsch Español فارسی ‎ Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 250,000+ articles Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gú Български Català Čeština Dansk Esperanto Euskara עברית Հայերեն 한국어 Magyar Norsk bokmål Română Simple English Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча 50,000+ articles Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bosanski کوردی Eesti Ελληνικά Frysk Gaeilge Galego Hrvatski ქართული Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių മലയാളം Македонски မြန်မာဘာသာ Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina ไทย తెలుగు اردو Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=1225315602 "

Welcome to Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit . 6,849,038 articles in English From toda's featured article DeLancey W. Gill (1859–1940) was an American drafter , landscape painter , and photographer. As a teenager, he moved in with an aunt in Washington, D.C. , after his mother and stepfather traveled west. He eventually found himself employed as an architectural draftsman for the Treasury . He created sketches and watercolor paintings of the city, with a particular focus on the still-undeveloped rural and poorer areas of the district. While working as an illustrator for the Smithsonian's Bureau of American Ethnology in the 1890s, he was appointed as the agenc's photographer without prior photographic training. He took portrait photographs that circulated widely of thousands of Native American delegates to Washington, including notable figures such as Chief Joseph and Geronimo . These photographs have come under modern criticism for his frequent use of props and clothing, sometimes outdated or inauthentic, given to the delegates. ( Full article... ) Recently featured: Oceanic whitetip shark RoboCop Tales of Monkey Island Archive By email More featured articles About Did you know ... Yevhen Klopotenko ... that Yevhen Klopotenko (pictured) fought a "war for borscht "? ... that a street in San Francisco was named after a man who used a false identity ? ... that Alfie Templeman described the style of his studio album Radiosoul as "incohesively cohesive"? ... that Rosemary Miller won her stat's skeet shooting championship one year after learning the sport, and then won a state shooting championship in all but two years for the rest of her life? ... that the Japanese boy band Nexz was created through the program Nizi Project season 2 ? ... that the Nazi collaborator Sebastiaan de Ranitz abandoned his office following Mad Tuesday , leaving his department in turmoil? ... that Gedling Town F.C.'s nickname "The Ferrymen" was inspired by the name of a pub located next to the tea's stadium? ... that Antonio Dini was the only survivor of a three-man crew after he crashed a plane into the sea, but had no recollection of the crash due to concussion? ... that after a pigeon sculpture in Wellington went missing, members of the public created a memorial for it? Archive Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Keir Starmer The New Popular Front wins the most seats in the National Assembly in the French legislative election but does not achieve a majority . The Labour Party wins the United Kingdom general election and Keir Starmer (pictured) becomes prime minister. Hurricane Beryl , the earliest-recorded Category 5 Atlantic hurricane in a calendar year, leaves at least 15 people dead in the Caribbean , Venezuela, and the United States. In the Netherlands, a new cabinet is sworn in, with Dick Schoof serving as the prime minister . Ongoing : Israel–Hamas war timeline Russian invasion of Ukraine timeline Sudanese civil war timeline Recent deaths : Jane McAlevey Rick Cluff Martti Wallén Audrey Flack Ismail Kadare Hugh Aldons Nominate an article On this day July 10 : Independence Day in the Bahamas ( 1973 ) Martin Luther King Jr. 1645 – English Civil War : The Parliamentarians destroyed the last Royalist field army at the Battle of Langport , ultimately giving Parliament control of the west of England. 1942 – An American naval aviator discovered a downed Japanese Mitsubishi A6M Zero on Akutan Island , Alaska, which was later rebuilt and flown to devise tactics against the aircraft during World War II. 1966 – Martin Luther King Jr. (pictured) led a rally in support of the Chicago Freedom Movement , one of the most ambitious civil-rights campaigns in the northern United States. 1999 – The United States defeated China in the final match of the third FIFA Wome's World Cup , setting records in both attendance and television ratings for wome's sports. 2006 – Typhoon Ewiniar made landfall in South Korea, causing damages across the country amounting to 2.06 trillion won (US$1.4 billion). Arthur Annesley, 1st Earl of Anglesey ( b. 1614) Eva Ekeblad ( b. 1724) Bobo Brazil ( b. 1924) Calogero Vizzini ( d. 1954) More anniversaries: July 9 July 10 July 11 Archive By email List of days of the year Toda's featured picture Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – The central hub for editors, with resources, links, tasks, and announcements. Village pump – Forum for discussions about Wikipedia itself, including policies and technical issues. Site news – Sources of news about Wikipedia and the broader Wikimedia movement. Teahouse – Ask basic questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Help desk – Ask questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Reference desk – Ask research questions about encyclopedic topics. Content portals – A unique way to navigate the encyclopedia. Wikipedi's sister projects Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation , a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects : Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning tools Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English . Many other Wikipedias are available ; some of the largest are listed below. 1,000,000+ articles العربية مصرى Deutsch Español فارسی ‎ Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 250,000+ articles Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gú Български Català Čeština Dansk Esperanto Euskara עברית Հայերեն 한국어 Magyar Norsk bokmål Română Simple English Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча 50,000+ articles Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bosanski کوردی Eesti Ελληνικά Frysk Gaeilge Galego Hrvatski ქართული Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių മലയാളം Македонски မြန်မာဘာသာ Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina ไทย తెలుగు اردو Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=1225315602 "

2024 Indian film directed by Vysakh Turbo is an 2024 Indian Malayalam -language action comedy film directed by Vysakh , written by Midhun Manuel Thomas and produced by Mammootty under Mammootty Kampany.   The film stars Mammootty in titular role, alongside Raj B. Shetty , Sunil , Kabir Duhan Singh , Anjana Jayaprakash , Niranjana Anoop , Bindu Panicker , Dileesh Pothan and Shabareesh Varma .   The music was composed by Christo Xavier, while Vishnu Sarma and Shameer Muhammed handled the cinematography and editing respectively.  Turbo was theatrically released on 23 May 2024 to mixed reviews from critics.  Plot [ edit ] Aruvipurathu Jose alias Turbo Jose, a jeep driver from Idukki with a habit of getting involved in fights, learns that his best friend Jerry, a bank manager in Chennai, was attacked by henchmen sent by the family of his girlfriend Indulekha, who is also a bank manager of a different bank. Jose arrives at Indulekh's house and stops her engagement, where he takes Indulekha to Jerr's house. However, Jerry refuses to accept Indulekha due to fear of his family and Indulekha goes to Chennai for her job. Jose learns that Indulekh's family have filed a case against him, where he leaves for Chennai and persuades her to come back home. However, Jose decides to stay at Chennai after learning that he will be imprisoned. On Jos's request, Indulekha helps him find a job at her customer Andrew, a rich car dealer , and Jose works as a bodyguard for Andrew. Jose manages to reunite Indulekha with her family. Meanwhile, Jerry gets informed by her colleague Sithara that an anonymous person from the bank had used Jerry’s passkey to transfer a huge amount of money to inactive accounts registered under other peopl's names. Jerry begins the investigation with Sithara, where he learns about that the real mastermind behind the scam is Vetrivel Shanmugam Sundaram, a ruthless and charismatic kingmaker , who has been manipulating the banking system to provide money to ruling party MLAs in order to shift their loyalties. Jerry learns that Vetrive's main bank account is in Indulekh's bank, where he tries to inform and warn Indulekha about the scam, but Indulekha does't listen to him as she hasn’t forgiven his rejection. Vetrivel learns that Jerry has learnt about his scam and soon kills Jerry. Jerr's death is termed as suicide in the autopsy report by Vetrivel. Later, Indulekha and Jose learn about Vetrive's scam and his involvement in Jerr's death. Indulekha complains to the police, but the police are under Vetrive's payroll and tries to kill her. However, Jose rescues Indulekha by thrashing the cops and they escape, where a cat and mouse game ensues in which Jose and Indulekha manages to save their family, consisting of Jos's mother Aruvipurathu Rosakutty and Indulekh's sister Niranjana, with the help of Andrew and Auto Billa. Jose and Indulekha exposes Vetrive's scam and Jose kills Vetrivel using a fish-slicing machine at Vetrive's fishery factory. In the aftermath, Jose, Indulekha, Rosakutty and Niranjana return to Idukki. They soon receive a parcel containing Andre's severed head with a letter sent by Vetrive's business partner, who wages a war against Jose for Vetrive's death. Cast [ edit ] Mammootty as Aruvipurathu Jose alias Turbo Jose Anjana Jayaprakash as Indhulekha Nair Raj B. Shetty as Vetrivel Shanmugha Sundaram Shabareesh Varma as Jerry Sunil as Auto Billa Kabir Duhan Singh as Vincent Niranjana Anoop as Sithara, Jerr's friend Bindu Panicker as Aruvippurathu Rosakutty, Jos's mother Roshan Chandra as Jerr's younger brother Adarsh Sukumaran as Basil, Jos's friend Dileesh Pothan as Andrew, a Chennai -based businessman Johny Antony as Vakkachan, Jos's neighbor Amina Nijam as Niranjana, Indhulekh's sister Basil as DCP Sukumar IPS Saravanan as Tamil Nadu CM Arivazhagan Aruldoss as CI Shakthivel Robo Shankar as MLA Karmegam VTV Ganesh as Minister Arivazhagan Chella Durai Nishanth Sagar as Indhulekh's brother Abu Salim as Geogre, Andre's bodyguard Prasanth Alexander as CI Davis Kottayam Ramesh as Mathukkutty, Jerr's father Spadikam Sunny as Indhulekh's uncle Kunchan as a villager Mani Shornur as Fr. Thomas Kuzhichattil Vineeth Thattil David as Karimban Sura, a local goon Abin Bino as Sanoop, Jerr's friend Sandhya Manoj as employee at Vetrive's company Manju Satheesh as Jerr's mother Sruthy Suresh as Nurse Supergood Subramani as SI Maarimuthu Vijay Sethupathi as Vetrive's business partner (post-credits) Production [ edit ] Turbo was made on a budget of ₹70 crores.  The film was officially announced on 24 October 2023, by Mammootty.  The principal photography commenced in October 2023 in Coimbatore and wrapped up on 18 February 2024.    Music [ edit ] The music and background score for the film was composed by Christo Xavier. The lyrics was written by Vinayak Sasikumar , Vaisakh Sugunan and SVDP. The track "Turbo Trailer Theme", which released on 12 May 2024.  The first single "Burnout The Engine" was released on 29 May 2024.  The second single "Maayika Maname" was released on 5 June 2024.  Release [ edit ] Theatrical [ edit ] Turbo was released on 23 May 2024.   Home media [ edit ] The digital streaming and satellite rights of the film were bought by Sony LIV and Zee Keralam .   Box Office This movie was a commercial failure due to high budget even though it received mixed to positive reviews from audience.  Reception [ edit ] Box office [ edit ] On its opening day Turbo earned ₹ 6.25 crore from Kerala . The film grossed ₹ 3.40 crore in India on 23 May 2024.  On its second day, the film grossed ₹ 8.1 crore worldwide, making a total of ₹ 15.50 crore.  In its first week, the film grossed ₹58 crore worldwide, ₹29.5 crore from India and ₹28.5 crore from overseas.  Critical response [ edit ] Anna Mathews of The Times of India gave 4/5 stars and wrote "Mammootty, like Malayalam cinema, is at an energetic high. There is a clue about a part two and this is a sequel that audiences will be waiting for."  Goutham S of Pinkvilla gave 3.5/5 stars and wrote "The 2-and-a-half-hour flick would surely satisfy many movie lovers who are craving an out-and-out action movie. On a side note, for anyone who is a fan of Jawan or Tamil cinema in particular, make sure to stick around for the tail-end for a surprise, potentially leading to a sequel."  Sanjith Sidhardhan of OTTplay gave 3/5 stars and wrote "Mammootty aces the five action scenes in Vysakh’s directorial, but it doesn’t rise above that. The generic script and a weak villain robs Turbo off the power to deliver a knockout punch."  Janani K of India Today gave 2.5/5 stars and wrote 'Turb' is a predictable action drama with a few quirks in the bag that make it a watchable affair."  Arjun Menon of Rediff rated 2.5/5 stars and wrote "While Turbo may not break new ground, it serves as a testament to Mammoott's unwavering allure, captivating audiences across generations."  Anandu Suresh of The New Indian Express rated 2/5 stars and wrote "Even as the script drags on endlessly, Vysak's movie is predominantly salvaged by Mammoott's no-holds-barred performance, operating in top gear, complemented by Raj B Shett's remarkable presence as the villain."  Latha Srinivasan of Hindustan Times wrote "The movie uses an interplay of comedy and fights to move from one situation to the next. Unfortunately, most of the comedy falls flat so it’s upto the fight sequences to save the day".  S. R. Praveen of The Hindu wrote "Vysakh’s ‘Turbo’ will be remembered for recycling all the old tropes that have been part of its genre since time immemorial and for its reluctance to try anything new."

Indian actor and film producer Muhammad Kutty Panaparambil Ismail (born 7 September 1951), known mononymously by the hypocorism Mammootty (  ), is an Indian actor and film producer who works predominantly in Malayalam -language films. He has also appeared in Tamil , Telugu , Kannada , Hindi , and English -language productions. In a career spanning five decades, he has appeared in more than 420 films, predominantly in lead roles. He is the recipient of several accolades , including three National Film Awards , nine Kerala State Film Awards , eleven Kerala Film Critics Awards and thirteen Filmfare Awards South . He was honored with the Padma Shri , the fourth-highest civilian award by the Government of India in 1998, for his contributions to cinema. He was also honored with the Kerala Prabha Award by the Government of Kerala in 2022. Mammootty made his debut in acting through Malayalam film Anubhavangal Paalichakal in 1971. His first leading role was in M. T. Vasudevan Nair's unreleased film Devalokam (1979). Mammoott's breakthrough came in 1981 when he received the Kerala State Film Award for Second Best Actor for his performance in Ahimsa . Major commercial successes during this time included the 1983 films Sandhyakku Virinja Poovu and Aa Raathri . Following a series of box office failures, the 1987 crime thriller New Delhi improved his commercial prospects. The films that followed through the next decade established Mammootty as one of the leading stars of Malayalam cinema. The 2000s were a period of critical and commercial success for him. His performance in the Hindi and English-language bilingual biopic Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar (2000) won him the National Film Award for Best Actor, and he won Kerala State Film Awards for Kaazcha (2004) and Paleri Manikyam (2009). He garnered further critical praise for the satire Pranchiyettan & the Saint (2010), drama Varsham (2014), period drama Pathemari (2015) and black comedy Unda (2019), and received Filmfare Awards for Best Actor for the first three. His highest-grossing releases include the action comedy Madhura Raja (2019), the action thriller Bheeshma Parvam (2022), and the crime thriller Kannur Squad (2023).    He is the chairman of Malayalam Communications, which runs the Malayalam television channels Kairali TV , Kairali News, and Kairali We. He is the owner of multiple production ventures, including the distribution-production banner, Playhouse, and production company, Mammootty Kampany. Early life and family Mammootty with Father Prasant Palakkappilly at Sacred Heart College where he completed his Pre degree . Mammootty was born on 7 September 1951 in Chandiroor .   He was raised in the village of Chempu near Vaikom in Kottayam district in the present-day state of Kerala , India in a middle-class Muslim family. His father, Ismail, had a wholesale garment and rice business and was involved in rice cultivation. His mother, Fatima, was a housewife. He is their eldest son. He has two younger brothers, Ibrahimkutty and Zakariah, and three younger sisters, Ameena, Sauda and Shafina.   He went to Government High School, Kulasekharamangalam, Kottayam for his primary education.  In the 1960s, his father moved the family to Ernakulam , where he attended Government School Ernakulam. He did his pre-university course (pre-degree) at Sacred Heart College, Thevara .  He attended Maharaj's College, Ernakulam , for his degree.  He graduated with an LL.B. from Government Law College, Ernakulam .  He practised law for two years in Manjeri .   He married Sulfath Kuttyy in 1979 in an arranged marriage . The couple has a daughter Surumi (born 1982), and a son Dulquer Salmaan (born 1986)—also an actor.  He resides in Kochi with his family. His younger brother, Ibrahimkutty, has also acted in Malayalam films . His nephews, Maqbool Salmaan and Ashkar Saudan , are Malayalam film and television actors.  Film career 1971–1982: Early career Mammootty made his onscreen debut as an extra in K. S. Sethumadhavan ’s Anubhavangal Paalichakal (1971) at the age of 20.  He made his second appearance in an uncredited role in the 1973 film Kaalachakram , directed by K. Narayanan . He was cast in a small role as a boatman.  It was in this film that he said his first dialogue.  In 1975, he acted in the theatre drama Sabarmathi .  After his graduation from Maharaja’s college in 1976, Mammootty began his practice as a lawyer in Manjeri . During this time, he met his mentor  M. T. Vasudevan Nair , who cast him in a pivotal role in Devalokam (1979).  However, due to financial constraints and conflicts among cast and crew, the film stopped shooting halfway. As the film did not get a release Vasudevan Nair cast him in a minor role in Vilkkanundu Swapnangal (1980), directed by Azad and scripted by Nair, his first credited role.  During the filming of Vilkkanundu Swapnangal, Mammootty met and got closer to Sreenivasan . When K. G. George was looking for a newcomer with a “smart and handsome personality” as a daredevil motorcycle jumper for his film Mela (1980), Sreenivasan suggested Mammoot's name while they were shooting at the Raymon circus at Ernakulam .  Mela was the first Malayalam film to feature him in a prominent role. He was then cast in a supporting role in Vijayachithra Combines’ big budget action film Sphodanam (1981), directed by P. G. Vishwambharan . He was credited as "Sajin" in the film as Vishwanbharan felt that the name "Mammootty" did not suit an actor.  The same year, he made his first-ever appearance as a lead actor in the Malayalam film Thrishna (1981), which won the Filmfare Award for Best Film . Later that year, he appeared in a supporting role in I. V. Sasi ’s political film Ahimsa (1981), which earned him the Kerala State Film Award for Second Best Actor .  The next year, he starred alongside Bharath Gopy in K. G. George’s epoch making Yavanika (1982), as a police inspector who is on the search for an unpopular tabla player of a travelling drama group who suddenly disappears.  Jijo Punnoose experimented Mammootty in a negative role in the epic period drama Padayottam (1982).  I. V. Sasi cast him in a pivotal role in John Jaffer Janardhanan (1982), the Malayalam remake of Manmohan Desai ’s Hindi film Amar Akbar Anthony (1977). He was then cast in a major supporting role in Sasi’s political drama Ee Nadu (1982), which was a major commercial success, becoming the highest grossing South Indian film of the year.  Mammootty played supporting roles in most of the films released during the year. He had 23 of his films released during the year.  1983–1986: Experimentation and breakthrough In 1983, he started to transition into leading roles. Balu Kiriyath experimented with Mammootty by casting him as the lead in the comedy drama Visa , which was declared a hit at the box office.  In his next film, Sandhyakku Virinja Poovu , directed by P. G. Vishwambaran, he played the role of a libertine lawyer who takes up the case of a female physician who is charged with medical negligence. The film became a major commercial success, running for 250 days in theatres. A critic of The Indian Express wrote, "Seema, as Dr. Bala gives a stand out performance, being particularly impressive in highly emotional sequences. She is matched in acting by Mammootty, who is advocate Jayamohan."  In 2017, The Times of India described Mammoott's role as one of the "astounding advocate roles he has given life to".  Sandhyakku Virinja Poovu is credited with solidifying Mammoott's status as a leading man .  He then starred in Vishwambara's Pinnilavu , a film about a fight of ethics between a father and son. A multi starrer, it was also a commercial success, running for 150 days in theatres.  He then appeared in a supporting role in K. G. Georg's controversial classic Lekhayude Maranam Oru Flashback . In the film, Mammootty plays the role of a film superstar, a character modelled after Prem Nazir . On 15 May 1983, Sreedhar Pillai of India Today wrote, "Mammootty, the current rage of the Malayalam screen, successfully apes the mannerisms of fellow actor Prem Nazir in his Prem Sagar role."  He then starred as an antihero in P. Padmaraja's classic Koodevide . In the film, he plays the role of a jealous and possessive lover of a boarding school teacher. The film was a major commercial success. Anandu Suresh of The Indian Express wrote, "Mammootty here adeptly navigated a range of emotions. But particularly impressive was his depiction of Thomas’ jealousy, triggered by Alice’s close bond with one of her students, a mother-son-like one which Thomas misconstrues as romantic. Mammootty skillfully showcased Thomas’ descent into villainy, capturing his character’s sinister demeanour and willingness to go the extra mile to win Alice’s affection just for himself."  His pairing with Suhasini was very successful and was continued in films like Ente Upasana (1984). Koodevide was also selected for screening in that yea's Indian Panorama. It also won the Kerala State Award for Best Film with Popular Appeal and Aesthetic Value .  He then collaborated with director Joshiy for the first time for Aa Raathri .  Despite mixed critical response, it was a commercial success. It had a very successful soundtrack, credited with launching Ilaiyaraaja's Malayalam film career.  Critics consider Aa Rathri to be a trendsetter. It is regarded to be the first of the Kutty Petty films, tear-jerker family-drama tragedy of the 1980s. Films of this genre typically featured a happy family in the beginning, with a well-placed husband-cum-father, a young mother and a girl child of the age of 3 or 4. In the end, the family gets into a whirlpool of relationship problems.  Other notable releases of the year were supporting roles in Fazi's Eettillam and I. V. Sas's political Iniyenkilum . Reviewing Iniyenkilum for India Today , Sreedhar Pillai wrote, "Mammootty easily outshines everyone else as the villainous politician."  In 1984, he starred as the smuggler Tharadas in I. V. Sas's Athirathram . The film achieved considerable commercial success and the character of Tharadas gained a cult following among the youth. Mammootty, who was considered a bankable leading actor was propelled to superstardom with the success of the film. Owing to the popularity of the character, it was reprised by Mammootty in Balram vs Tharadas (2006).  He then starred in I. V. Sas's Kanamarayathu , an adaptation of the 1912 novel Daddy-Long-Legs by Jean Webster . In the film he plays the role of the sole successor of a rich business empire who falls for an orphan girl younger than him. Kanamarayathu explores the concept of relationships between couples with a large disparity in their ages , which challenged Indian social mores. Upon release the film received critical acclaim and became a commercial success.  For his performance as Roy Varghese, Mammootty won his first Kerala Film Critics Association Award for Best Actor .  The film has over the years accumulated a cult following and is now considered a classic in Malayalam cinema.  He then starred as a police officer in Bharathan's Ithiri Poove Chuvannapoove . The film explores the relationship between a police officer and his younger brother, who becomes a Naxalite . It was a critical success and had a successful soundtrack.  He then appeared in a supporting role in the art house film , Akkare . In the film he portrays a non resident Malayali . The film is a satirical take on the obsession, especially of the middle class of othe's lifestyle.  He then starred as a vengeful fisherman back from prison in I. V. Sas's Adiyozhukkukal . The film was a commercial and critical success. Mammootty won his first Kerala State Film Award for Best Actor and his first Filmfare Award for Best Actor – Malayalam for his performance as Karunan.  Mammoott's performance in the film is often considered one of the best in his early career. The film was produced by Casino Productions, a production company owned by Century Kochumon, Mohanlal , I. V. Sasi , and Mammootty.  He also starred in I. V. Sas's Aalkkoottathil Thaniye , a box office hit. In 1988, film scholar Vasanthi Shankaranarayanan wrote, " Aalkkottathil Thaniye shows the changing image of woman in contemporary Malayalam cinema. From weak and enslaved to strong and independent."  Aalkkottathil Thaniye , the screenplay was released as a book by DC Books in 2009.  That year he also starred in several Kutty Petty films that received negative critical reviews but were successful at the box office, notable of which were Sandarbham , Koottinilamkili and Chakkarayumma . The former of which was a major box office hit, running for 150 days in theatres. It was one of the highest grossing films of the year. The genre had now become synonymous with Mammootty, being renamed the Mammootty-Kutty-Petty film.  The following year, he starred in Padmaraja's Thinkalaazhcha Nalla Divasam , based on the radio drama Ammaykku Vendi by Sajini Pavithran , in which he plays the role of a man who wants to sell his ancestral house and put his mother in an old age home. The film explores the layers of family relationship in a rural setting threatened by urban culture and explains how the imminent breakdown of the joint family is prevented by a death. Upon release, the film was critically acclaimed, winning the National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Malayalam that year. He then starred in I. V. Sas's Anubandham , scripted by M. T. Vasudevan Nair, the film was released to widespread critical acclaim, winning four Kerala State Film Awards that year. He collaborated with Nair and Sasi once again that year with Karimbinpoovinakkare , in which he played the role of Shivan, who in a state of rage kills his best friend due to a misunderstanding and explores how he repents for his sin.  The film was a commercial success.  He then, starred as Ravi Varma, a millionaire on death row for killing his wife in Joshi's Nirakkoottu . The film was a major critical and commercial success, becoming one of the highest grossing films of that year.  The film won the Filmfare Award for Best Malayalam film.  He then starred as a forest officer who is mistaken for a Naxalite, arrested and jailed for many years in Balu Mahendr's romantic drama Yathra . The film tells a fictional story but is built upon the human rights violations by the police and the prison authorities in India during the emergency of 1975–1977, when the fundamental rights of the citizens were suspended. It is an adaptation of the 1977 Japanese classic The Yellow Handkerchief .  The film was released to widespread critical acclaim, winning the Kerala State Film Award for Best Film with Popular Appeal and Aesthetic Value . It was declared a blockbuster, running for 200 days in theatres,  becoming the highest grossing Malayalam film of the year.  For his performance, Mammootty won the Filmfare Best Actor Award for his performance in Yathra , as well as a Special Jury Award for his performances in both Yathra and Nirakkoottu .   In 1986 alone, he acted in about 35 films, including a brief appearance in Mazha Peyyunnu Maddalam Kottunnu . In 1986, he teamed up with I. V. Sasi for the film Aavanazhi , which was written by T. Damodaran. Mammootty appears in the lead role as Balram, a police officer. Both Inspector Balram and Balram vs. Tharadas are sequels to this film. The film was a huge hit at the box office. The film ran for over 200 days. The film was remade in Tamil, Telugu, and Hindi.   1987–1990 Following a series of flops, Mammootty found commercial success with the crime thriller New Delhi (1987), directed by Joshiy and written by Dennis Joseph .  He played G. Krishnamoorthy, a victimised journalist who systematically arranges the killing of politicians who had implicated him under false charges.  New Delhi was a commercial success, becoming the highest-grossing Malayalam film released at that point.   After its release, Rajinikanth , wanting to remake the film in Tamil, offered to buy the rights from Joseph, but the rights for Kannada, Telugu and Hindi-language remakes were already sold by that time.  In the same year, he played Balagopalan, a school teacher who is deemed mad by society owing to a superstitious belief, in the drama Thaniyavarthanam , directed by Sibi Malayil and written by A. K. Lohithadas .  It won the Filmfare Award for Best Film – Malayalam at the Filmfare Awards South.  Mammoott's performance received acclaim from film critics.  In the first of his several releases in 1988, Mammootty appeared in the comedy film Manu Uncle , directed by Dennis Joseph. Mohanlal and Suresh Gopi made cameo appearances in the film.   It received the National Film Award for Best Childre's Film at the 36th National Film Awards .   Mammootty played an investigator called Sethurama Iyer in another film, Oru CBI Diary Kurippu , which served as the first instalment in the CBI series.  The film set box office records both in Kerala and Tamil Nadu .    The fil's one-year theatrical run in Tamil Nadu continues to remain an all-time record. That year, he also appeared in the Sibi Malayil -directed action film August 1 ,  which was based on the novel The Day of the Jackal , by Frederick Forsyth .  The fil's rights were sold in Tamil Nadu for a record-breaking price at the time.  Additionally, Mammootty and I. V. Sasi worked together on three projects in the same year: the romantic film Abkari , the drama Mukthi and the war film 1921 .  In the latter, Mammootty played Khader, a World War I veteran who joins the Malabar rebellion . The film, which cost over ₹ 1.2 crore to produce, earned ₹ 2 crore during its theatrical run.  In 1988, Mammootty collaborated with Joshiy for two films, Sangham and Thanthram .  The following year, Mammootty starred with Rahman and Shobana in the G. S. Vijayan thriller film Charithram .  The story is adapted from the English movie Chase a Crooked Shadow . The story is about the relationship between two brothers.  In the same year, he acted in a film which is considered as one of the best crime thriller in Malayalam cinema, Adikkurippu , written by S. N. Swamy and directed by K. Madhu .  In 1989, Mammootty starred in the lead as Chandu Chekavar , in the epic historical drama film Oru Vadakkan Veeragatha , directed by Hariharan and written by M. T. Vasudevan Nair .  The movie has won four National Film Awards , including Best Actor (Mammootty), Best Screenplay (M.T Vasudevan Nair), Best Production Design and Best Costume Design ( P. Krishnamoorthy ). The movie has selected as Best Malayalam Movie in Filmfare Awards , also the movie has won seven Kerala State Film Awards .   The movie received both commercial and critical acclaim and ran for over 300 days. It is considered as one of the greatest films of all time.  In an online poll conducted in 2013 by IBN Live , as a part of Indian Cinema completing 100 years, Oru Vadakkan Veeragatha listed as the third greatest Indian Film of all time.  In the same year, Mammootty starred with Sukumaran in the Mystery - thriller film Utharam , written by M. T. Vasudevan Nair . The story was based on the short story No Motive by Daphne du Maurier . Utharam is considered as one of the best investigate thrillers in Malayalam cinema.   Second movie in CBI (film series) , Jagratha released in the same year. It is considered as one of the best investigate thrillers in Malayalam.  In the same year Mammootty joined with Joshiy , in the movie Mahayanam , which was a critical and commercial success.  In 1989, Mammootty appeared as hunter in Mrigayaa , Directed by I. V. Sasi and written by A. K. Lohithadas . The movie was a major success and I.V Sasi won the Kerala State Award for Best Director.  In 1989, Mammootty won the Best Actor Award in Kerala State Film Awards for the movies Oru Vadakkan Veeragatha, Mrigayaa and Mahayanam.  In 1990, he starred in Kottayam Kunjachan , an action comedy film directed by T. S. Suresh Babu and written by Dennis Joseph .  The movie has become one of the highest-grossing film in the year.  Mammootty played the role Kunjachan which is a character from the novel Veli written by Muttathu Varkey .  Mammootty made his Tamil debut the same year with Mounam Sammadham .     N. Krishnaswamy of The Indian Express wrote, "Mammootty plays the no-nonsense hero in the film with such dignity, poise and grace."  Mammootty won Best Actor Award in National Film Award in 1990 for the movie Oru Vadakkan Veeragatha and Mathilukal .  The film focuses on the prison life of Vaikom Muhammad Basheer and the love between him and Narayani, a female inmate of the prison, who remains unseen throughout the film. The movie was critically acclaimed and considered as the best classics of Malayalam Cinema.  The movie has won four National Film Awards .  When Indian Cinemas Completes 100 Years, Forbes included the performance of Mammootty in the list "25 Greatest Acting Performances of Indian Cinema".  Mammootty appeared as Alexander in the 1990 in a Gangster film Samrajyam , Directed by Jomon with music composed by Ilaiyaraaja .  The movie has commercially a major success at Kerala and Andhra Pradesh box-office.  The movie has run for more than 200 days in Kerala and 400 days in Andhra Pradesh.  In 1990, Mammootty was part of No.20 Madras Mail directed by Joshiy . Mammootty done a cameo role as himself and Mohanlal was in the lead role.  1991–1994 In 1991, he starred in Amaram , directed by Bharathan and written by A. K. Lohithadas . Mammootty played the character Achootty, an uneducated fisherman who wants his daughter to be educated and wants her to become a doctor. The role helped Mammootty to grab another Filmfare award for Best actor.  In the same year he has done two Tamil films Thalapathi and Azhagan . Both the films were commercially successful.  Thalapathi is adaptation from the Hindu Epic, Mahabharata .  In the same year, Mammootty joined with I.V Sasi for two movies, Inspector Balram and Neelagiri . Inspector Balram was a sequel to his 1986 film Aavanazhi . The movie was commercially successful.  In 1992, he acted with Kannada actor Vishnuvardhan in the action thriller movie Kauravar .  Mammootty played the character Putturumees in the movie Soorya Manasam , who is a mentally challenged man who lives with his mother in a small village. Mammootty was critically acclaimed for the role and the movie is based on 1937 American Novel Of Mice and Men by John Steinbeck .  Sowcar Janaki played the mother character.  In the same year he acted in movie Pappayude Swantham Appoos , directed and written by Fazil . The movie explores the relationship between a father and son. The film was both commercial and critical success and ran for more than 200 days.  Mammootty done his entry to Telugu industry through Swathi Kiranam in the year 1992.  In 1993, Mammootty joined with Joshiy for an Action film Dhruvam . It was Vikram debut in Malayalam Cinema.  The film was a super hit at the box-office.  In the year Mammootty won the kerala State Film Award for Best Actor and for the movie Vatsalyam , directed by Cochin Haneefa , Ponthan Mada directed by T. V. Chandran and Vidheyan directed and written by Adoor Gopalakrishnan .  He also won National Film Award for Best Actor for the movie Ponthan Mada and Vidheyan at the same year.  In the year Mammootty done a Tamil movie Kilipetchu Ketkava , directed by Fazil .  Mammootty made his Bollywood debut with the 1993 release Dhartiputra  1995–1999 In 1995, the combination of the writer Sreenivasan and director Kamal created the character Nandakumar Varma, who is a college professor in the romantic drama Mazhayethum Munpe .   He acted as an aggressive yet honourable District Collector Thevalliparambil Joseph Alex IAS in his following release, a Political thriller film The King . It became the highest-grossing Malayalam film at that time.  In the same year, he starred in the Tamil political thriller Makkal Aatchi , directed by R. K. Selvamani and produced by Thirupur A. Selvaraj under Aarthi International. The fil's music was composed by Ilaiyaraaja . The film was also dubbed in Malayalam as Ente Naadu . The movie was clashed with Rajinikanth starrer Muthu at the same time and Mammootty took the lead over Rajinikanth in Tamil Nadu.  Mammoott's first Malayalam release of 1996 was Azhakiya Ravanan , a Romantic Drama directed by Kamal and written by Sreenivasan.  The next film he acted in was Hitler written and directed by Siddique . The film was remade in several languages. The film was a commercial success at the box office and was the highest grossing Malayalam movie, breaking his own movie record The King at that time. The movie has run over 300 days in theatres.  He also did a direct Telugu movie in the same year Surya Putrulu , directed by C. Umamaheswara Rao . The film was a moderate success at the box office.  In 1997 Mammootty won the Best Actor Award in Filmfare Awards for the performance in the movie Bhoothakkannadi , directed by Lohithadas. It is considered as one of the finest performance in the actor career. In an interview, Mammootty revealed that he want to direct the movie with Rajinikanth in lead.  In the same year Mammootty done two Tamil films Pudhayal , directed by Selva and Arasiyal , directed by R. K. Selvamani . In 1998, Mammootty played the role of an IPS officer in the investigation thriller film The Truth , written by S. N. Swamy and directed by Shaji Kailas .  He played the lead role in Oru Maravathoor Kanavu , which was the directorial debut of Lal Jose in 1998.  In the same year, he starred in Harikrishnans , co-starring Mohanlal and Juhi Chawla . The movie has two climaxes, and Shah Rukh Khan was supposed to do a pivotal role, but did't happen due to unknown reasons.  in the same year, Mammootty done a guest appearance in the Bollywood movie Swami Vivekananda , directed by G. V. Iyer .  In 1999, Mammootty won the Best Actor in National Film Awards for the movie Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar , directed by Jabbar Patel . The performance is considered as one of the finest one in his career. The movie is produced by National Film Development Corporation .  Mammootty joined with Priyadarshan in the same year for the movie Megham , which is a commercial success.  2000–2009 Mammootty in 2009 In 2000, Mammootty did a cameo role in Narasimham , in which Mohanlal did the main role. The movie was a huge success at the boxoffice.  With the huge success of Narasimham, director Shaji Kailas , joined with Mammootty in the same year for another action drama Valliettan . The movie was also a huge success in box office.  2000 was one of the best year for the actor in box office performance, after the huge success of Narasimham and Valliettan, Mammootty continued the success with the movies Dada Sahib and Tamil movie Kandukondain Kandukondain , co-starring Ajith Kumar and Aishwarya Rai . Both movies were blockbuster in box office.   Mammootty won the Best Actor Award in Filmfare Awards in 2000 for his performance in Arayannangalude Veedu .  He continued his box office reign in 2001 too. In the year, he began with Rakshasa Rajavu , directed by Vinayan . The movie was a huge success in box office.  He has done the lead role in N. Lingusamy directorial debut Aanandham in the same year. The movie was a commercial and critical success.  In 2003, Mammootty played Sathyaprathapan, a bachelor in romantic comedy Drama Film Chronic Bachelor , directed by Siddique . The film received positive reviews and became a commercial success at the box office.  Mammootty also acted in Pattalam , by director Lal Jose , in which he plays an Indian Army officer, Major Pattabhiraman. The movie made an average performance in the box office.  In 2004, he acted in the third instalment of CBI , Sethurama Iyer CBI . The movie has become the second highest-grossing movie of the year.  Mammootty won Kerala State Film Awards and Filmfare awards for Best Actor for the performance in the movie Kaazhcha . The movie was the directorial debut of Blessy . The movie got many critical receptions from all over.  In the same year he appeared as a police officer in Ranjith movie Black . The movie was a box office hit.  After this action film, he appeared as a family man in Vesham , who sacrifice his life for his younger brother.  2005 was one of the best year for the actor in both box office and in performance. He was seen in never seen characters in the movies like Thommanum Makkalum , Thaskaraveeran and Rajamanikyam . In this, Rajamanikyam was industry hit. The movie has created and broke many records in the box office. The actor was seen in a never seen character. Other releases were Rappakal , Nerariyan CBI which is the fourth instalment of CBI (film series) and Bus Conductor . These movies all made money in box office. The characters in each film were different in each others. The actor was totally controlling the box office in the year.  In 2006, the actor continues his performance in box office and was utmost care in choosing the character. Mammootty started the year with action comedy film Thuruppugulan , which was a super hit in box office. The next release was Balram vs. Tharadas , which was the sequel of Athirathram and Inspector Balram . Katrina Kaif played the female lead in the movie and the only Malayalam movie she acted.  At the end of the year actor changed to do off-beat movies such as Karutha Pakshikal and Palunku . The actor was nominated in the National Awards for Best actor at the year.  He won the Best Actor in Filmfare Awards for the movie Karutha Pakshikal.  He started 2007 with the off-beat film Kaiyoppu . Then he back with the comedy action film Mayavi , directed by Shafi . The movie became the highest grosser in the state in the year.  The next was Big B , which was the directorial debut of Amal Neerad . The movie was an average grosser in box office but still manages to completes more than 100 days in Kerala box office. After the release of the DVD of the movie the movie got many appreciation for the cinematography and editing. The movie redefined how to make a mass action movie to be made in Mollywood. Mammootty won the appreciation for the slow-motion walking and the background music is still trending.  In the year the actor shown his box office and performance power in the movie Katha Parayumpol . He done an extended cameo role in the movie. The movie was remade in three languages, Kuselan in Tamil, Billu Barber in Hindi and Kathanayakudu . All the remakes failed in the respective box office. Mammootty was appraised for his performance in the movie.  He begin 2008 with action film Roudram , directed by Renji Panicker . Mammootty joined with Anwar Rasheed after the industrial hit Rajamanikyam . This time for the comedy action movie Annan Thampi . The movie was a superhit in the boxoffice. The movie done a huge business all over. Telegu rights has sold for a record price until that time.  His next releases were Parunthu , Mayabazar . He done a cameo role in One Way Ticket in which Prithviraj Sukumaran done the lead role. These movies did't done any boxoffice wonders. After that he did the lead role in the biggest multistar movie in Malayalam Twenty:20 , directed by Joshiy .   In 2009, he done the all time blocbuster epic period drama film Kerala Varma Pazhassi Raja , written by M. T. Vasudevan Nair and directed by Hariharan . the film has collected around 49cr in box office.  He also done performance oriented movies like Kerala Cafe and Paleri Manikyam . He won Best Actor Award in both Kerala State Film Awards and Filmfare Awards for the movie Paleri Manikyam.   In the same year he done the action comedy film Chattambinadu , another performance oriented movie Loudspeaker and the directorial debut of Aashiq Abu , Daddy Cool . These movie has done Hit status in boxoffice.  2010–2019 Mammootty at Successful party of Abrahaminte Santhathikal In the year 2010, Mammootty acted in the films Drona 2010 , directed by Shaji Kailas ,  Yugapurushan , directed by R. Sukumaran,  Pramaani , directed by B. Unnikrishnan ,  Pokkiri Raja , the directorial debut of Vysakh Abraham,  Kutty Srank , directed by Shaji N. Karun ,  Pranchiyettan & the Saint , directed by Ranjith ,  Best of Luck , directed by M. A. Nishad  and Best Actor , Martin Prakkat's debut film.  His films August 15 , directed by Shaji Kailas ,  Doubles , directed by Sohan Seenulal,  The Train , directed by Jayaraj , Bombay March 12 , directed by Babu Janardhanan and Venicile Vyaapari , directed by Shafi appeared in 2011.  In 2012, his films included: The King & the Commissioner , directed by Shaji Kailas ,  the Kannada-Malayalam bilingual film Shikari directed by Abhaya Simha ,  Cobra , directed by Lal , Thappana , directed by Johny Antony , Jawan of Vellimala , directed by Anoop Kannan , (Mammootty produced the film), Face to Face , directed by V. M. Vinu and Bavuttiyude Namathil , directed by G. S. Vijayan.  His first films released in 2013 were Kammath & Kammath , directed by Thomson and Immanuel , directed by Lal Jose .  Later, he went on to appear in Kadal Kadannoru Mathukkutty , directed by Ranjith , which was released for Ramzan season, Kunjananthante Kada , directed by Salim Ahamed and Daivathinte Swantham Cleetus , directed by G. Marthandan.  His next release was Silence , directed by V. K. Prakash .  He acted in Balyakalasakhi , directed by Pramod Payyannur , Praise the Lord , directed by Shibu Gangadharan and Gangster , directed by Aashiq Abu in the first half of 2014.  He also acted in: Manglish , directed by Salam Bappu , Munnariyippu , directed by Venu , RajadhiRaja , directed by debutant Ajai Vasudev and Varsham , directed by Ranjith Sankar . Mammootty received critical praise for his portrayal of C.K. Raghavan in Munnariyippu ,  while Sify called RajadhiRaja "a genuine hit for Mammootty after a long time".  Nicy V.P. of International Business Times wrote: " Varsham is a movie worth investing your time and money."  His 2015 releases were Fireman , directed by Deepu Karunakaran, Bhaskar the Rascal , directed by Siddique , a commercial success,  Acha Dhin , directed by Marthandan. Utopiayile Rajavu , directed by Kamal and Pathemari , directed by Salim Ahamed .  He acted in Puthiya Niyamam alongside Nayanthara directed by A. K. Sajan in the first half of 2016. He also acted in Kasaba directed by debutant director Nithin Renji Paniker. His next releases for the year was White directed by Uday Ananthan and Thoppil Joppan , directed by Johny Antony marking their fourth collaboration.  In 2017, his first release was The Great Father directed by debutant Haneef Adeni . He was then seen in Puthan Panam directed by Ranjith , Pullikkaran Staraa directed by Syamdhar and Masterpiece directed by Ajai Vasudev .  In 2018, he acted in Parole directed by debutant Sharrath Sandith. He has then seen in Uncle written by Joy Mathew and directed by debutant Girish Damodar. His next release was Abrahaminte Santhathikal , a crime thriller directed by debutant Shaji Padoor. His last release for the year was Oru Kuttanadan Blog directed and written by Sethu .  In 2018, he acted in critically acclaimed Tamil movie Peranbu directed by Ram .   It was selected for Rotterdam Film Festival , Shanghai International Film Festival and International Film Festival of India .  His role of single parent Amudhavan who struggles with raising his spastic girl child, Paapa was well appreciated by critics.   His first release of 2019 was Madhura Raja , a spin-off to the 2010 film Pokkiri Raja directed by Vysakh . It becomes the best-grossing film in Mammoott's career.  His next release was Unda directed by Khalid Rahman in which he played the role of a Sub-inspector of Police who led the team of a police unit for state election duty in a Maoist prone area in Chhattisgarh .  He was then seen in an extended cameo in the film Pathinettam Padi directed by Shankar Ramakrishnan . Later in the year, Mammootty was in the historical drama Mamangam directed by M. Padmakumar , which is based on the historical Mamankam festival in the banks of the Bharathappuzha .  He was also in Ramesh Pisharody's Ganagandharvan in which he plays a ‘ganamela’ singer named Kalasadhan Ullas and Ajai Vasudev's Shylock .   After two decades, Mammootty returned to Telugu cinema in 2019 with the biopic Yatra which is based on former Andhra Pradesh chief minister YS Rajasekhar Reddy directed by Mahi Raghav .   2020–present In 2021, He starred in The Priest , directed by Jofin T. Chacko featuring Manju Warrier marking her first collaboration with Mammootty.  He then starred in the political thriller One , directed by Santhosh Vishwanath. He played Kadakkal Chandran, Chief Minister of Kerala in the film.  In 2022, He starred in Bheeshma Parvam directed by Amal Neerad , which received positive responses and was a blockbuster.  He then starred in CBI 5: The Brain , which emerged as a box office success. He appeared in Nanpakal Nerathu Mayakkam received highly critical acclaim for his role which won him the Kerala State Award for the Best Actor .  In 2023, he acted in the Telugu movie Agent starring Akhil Akkineni .  Films in other languages He has acted in Tamil films for directors including K. Balachander's ( Azhagan ), Mani Ratnam's ( Thalapathy ), Fazil's ( Kilippechu Kekkavaa ), N. Linguswamy's ( Aanandham ), R. K. Selvamani's ( Makkal Aatchi ), Marumalarchi Bharathi's ( Marumalarchi ) and Ethirum Puthirum and Rajiv Menon ( Kandukondain Kandukondain ) (2000). He played Anantha Sharma in K. Viswanath's Telugu film Swathi Kiranam (1992).  Other work Mammootty at an event for A.M.M.A in 2007 During the 1980s, Mammootty was the co-owner of a production company, Casino, along with Mohanlal , I.V. Sasi , Seema and Century Kochumon. The films it produced included Nadodikkattu (1987), Gandhinagar 2nd Street (1986), Adiyozhukkukal and Karimpin Poovinakkare .  He formed a television production company , Megabytes, which produced television serials , the first being Jwalayay  in the late 1990s, which was also his first project as a producer .  Mammootty also owns a distribution company named Mammootty Technotainment.  He is the owner of Playhouse since 2009, a company which primarily distributes films he has starred in.  It has since ventured into film production, with ventures including the Jawan of Vellimala and Street Lights .   As of 2010, he is the chairman of Malayalam Communications, which runs some Malayalam TV channels such as Kairali TV , People TV and Channel We.  In 2021, he founded another production company, the Mammootty Kampany, which produced the films Rorschach (2022) and Nanpakal Nerathu Mayakkam (2022).   He has stated he has no political ambitions.  In 2007, Mammootty published his first book, Kazhchapadu (roughly translated as "Perspective"), a compilation of short essays he had written in various publications over the years.   That year, he and Dubai -based businessman MA Yousuf Ali lobbied for the proposed Smart City project at Kochi with officials of the Dubai Internet City (DIC).  Philanthropic and social causes Mammootty is a patron of the Pain and Palliative Care Society, a charitable organisation in Kerala , that aims to improve the quality of people in advanced stages of cancer . He has been working with the Pain and Palliative Care Centre situated in Kozhikode , India.  In 2018, he put forth a project to provide the pain and palliative care to those suffering from cancer throughout Kerala.  He is also a patron of the Care and Share International Foundation, a charity organisation aimed at reducing societal inequality. Among its endeavours, the foundation mobilised financial help for the heart surgeries of children with the Hridaya Sparsham project. A fundraiser over social networking sites supported by Mammootty raised about ₹ 1 crore within a day.  Mammootty is the goodwill ambassador of the charity project Street India Movement, which lists the elimination of child begging and child labour among its goals. He has promoted the activities of the movement, which coordinates with orphanages and institutions looking after the children.  He is also goodwill ambassador for Akshaya , the information technology dissemination project of the Government of Kerala .   He formally took over the role on 26 February 2006 at a video-telecasted programme that was linked to all district headquarters of the state.  He also promotes the anti-drug campaign Addicted to Life, launched by the Government of Kerala and affiliated with the Kerala State Beverages Corporation, which aims to eradicate drugs and alcohol usage among people, especially the youth.  In August 2014, Mammootty launched the My Tree Challenge, modelled after the Ice Bucket Challenge , which purports to encourage others to plant saplings, as the rules dictate that they should if challenged.  The challenge was created by Abdul Manaf, an entrepreneur, and Imthias Kadeer, a travel photographer. Mammootty challenged Mohanlal and Shah Rukh Khan to take up the challenge.  Kazhcha, organised by Mammootty Fans Welfare Association and Mammootty Times, in association with Little Flower Hospital and Research Centre and the Eye Bank Association of Kerala , is a venture to extend free eye care and treatment. One of the major activities related to this is the distribution of free spectacles to children. A special fund received from the office of the President of India will be utilised for this purpose. Free eye camps will also be conducted at various places in connection with this project.  Media image and artistry Mammootty and Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan in Dubai in 2022 Unlike other Indian film industries, which saw the emergence of superstars that commanded a great degree of fame and stardom post-Indian independence, Malayalam cinema historically focused on stories that dealt with the lives of ordinary people, and did not generally have superstars, with the possible exception of Prem Nazir .  This changed in the 1980s with the growing popularity of Mammootty and Mohanlal.  Sreedhar Pillai of India Today wrote in December 1988, "So impregnable is their hold over the industry today that new films are launched only if they have the time."  In 2005, films starring Mammootty, Mohanlal and Dileep accounted for 97 per cent of the box office revenue of Malayalam cinema.  During the 2006 IIFA Awards ceremony held at Dubai , he openly criticised the organizers of the IIFA Awards for completely ignoring South Indian film by stating that the Bollywood film industry should stand up to competition from the South Indian film industry before calling itself international.  In 2013, his role in Mathilukal was listed among the "25 Greatest Acting Performances of Indian Cinema " by Forbes India on the occasion of celebrating 100 years of Indian Cinema.  Mammootty was appointed as the brand ambassador of the Thrissur -based South Indian Bank on 16 October 2006.   He was also featured as the brand ambassador for Kerala Volleyball League.  Filmography Main article: Mammootty filmography Discography Accolades Main article: List of awards and nominations received by Mammootty Mammootty speech at Innotech Awards on 2018-07-26 in RavindraBharathi Mammootty has won three National Film Awards , seven Kerala State Film Awards , thirteen Filmfare Awards , eleven Kerala Film Critics Awards and five Asianet Film Awards (from fourteen nominations). In 1998, the government of India honoured Mammootty with its fourth highest civilian award, Padma Shri for his contribution to the Indian film industry.   He was conferred with the Doctor of Letters degree by the University of Calicut and the University of Kerala in 2010.   In 2022, he was the honoured with Kerala Prabha , the second-highest award given by the Government of Kerala.  National Film Awards 1999: National Film Award for Best Actor for Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar  1994: National Film Award for Best Actor for Vidheyan and Ponthan Mada  1989: National Film Award for Best Actor for Oru Vadakkan Veeragatha and Mathilukal

Welcome to Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit . 6,849,038 articles in English From toda's featured article DeLancey W. Gill (1859–1940) was an American drafter , landscape painter , and photographer. As a teenager, he moved in with an aunt in Washington, D.C. , after his mother and stepfather traveled west. He eventually found himself employed as an architectural draftsman for the Treasury . He created sketches and watercolor paintings of the city, with a particular focus on the still-undeveloped rural and poorer areas of the district. While working as an illustrator for the Smithsonian's Bureau of American Ethnology in the 1890s, he was appointed as the agenc's photographer without prior photographic training. He took portrait photographs that circulated widely of thousands of Native American delegates to Washington, including notable figures such as Chief Joseph and Geronimo . These photographs have come under modern criticism for his frequent use of props and clothing, sometimes outdated or inauthentic, given to the delegates. ( Full article... ) Recently featured: Oceanic whitetip shark RoboCop Tales of Monkey Island Archive By email More featured articles About Did you know ... Yevhen Klopotenko ... that Yevhen Klopotenko (pictured) fought a "war for borscht "? ... that a street in San Francisco was named after a man who used a false identity ? ... that Alfie Templeman described the style of his studio album Radiosoul as "incohesively cohesive"? ... that Rosemary Miller won her stat's skeet shooting championship one year after learning the sport, and then won a state shooting championship in all but two years for the rest of her life? ... that the Japanese boy band Nexz was created through the program Nizi Project season 2 ? ... that the Nazi collaborator Sebastiaan de Ranitz abandoned his office following Mad Tuesday , leaving his department in turmoil? ... that Gedling Town F.C.'s nickname "The Ferrymen" was inspired by the name of a pub located next to the tea's stadium? ... that Antonio Dini was the only survivor of a three-man crew after he crashed a plane into the sea, but had no recollection of the crash due to concussion? ... that after a pigeon sculpture in Wellington went missing, members of the public created a memorial for it? Archive Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Keir Starmer The New Popular Front wins the most seats in the National Assembly in the French legislative election but does not achieve a majority . The Labour Party wins the United Kingdom general election and Keir Starmer (pictured) becomes prime minister. Hurricane Beryl , the earliest-recorded Category 5 Atlantic hurricane in a calendar year, leaves at least 15 people dead in the Caribbean , Venezuela, and the United States. In the Netherlands, a new cabinet is sworn in, with Dick Schoof serving as the prime minister . Ongoing : Israel–Hamas war timeline Russian invasion of Ukraine timeline Sudanese civil war timeline Recent deaths : Jane McAlevey Rick Cluff Martti Wallén Audrey Flack Ismail Kadare Hugh Aldons Nominate an article On this day July 10 : Independence Day in the Bahamas ( 1973 ) Martin Luther King Jr. 1645 – English Civil War : The Parliamentarians destroyed the last Royalist field army at the Battle of Langport , ultimately giving Parliament control of the west of England. 1942 – An American naval aviator discovered a downed Japanese Mitsubishi A6M Zero on Akutan Island , Alaska, which was later rebuilt and flown to devise tactics against the aircraft during World War II. 1966 – Martin Luther King Jr. (pictured) led a rally in support of the Chicago Freedom Movement , one of the most ambitious civil-rights campaigns in the northern United States. 1999 – The United States defeated China in the final match of the third FIFA Wome's World Cup , setting records in both attendance and television ratings for wome's sports. 2006 – Typhoon Ewiniar made landfall in South Korea, causing damages across the country amounting to 2.06 trillion won (US$1.4 billion). Arthur Annesley, 1st Earl of Anglesey ( b. 1614) Eva Ekeblad ( b. 1724) Bobo Brazil ( b. 1924) Calogero Vizzini ( d. 1954) More anniversaries: July 9 July 10 July 11 Archive By email List of days of the year Toda's featured picture Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – The central hub for editors, with resources, links, tasks, and announcements. Village pump – Forum for discussions about Wikipedia itself, including policies and technical issues. Site news – Sources of news about Wikipedia and the broader Wikimedia movement. Teahouse – Ask basic questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Help desk – Ask questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Reference desk – Ask research questions about encyclopedic topics. Content portals – A unique way to navigate the encyclopedia. Wikipedi's sister projects Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation , a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects : Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning tools Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English . Many other Wikipedias are available ; some of the largest are listed below. 1,000,000+ articles العربية مصرى Deutsch Español فارسی ‎ Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 250,000+ articles Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gú Български Català Čeština Dansk Esperanto Euskara עברית Հայերեն 한국어 Magyar Norsk bokmål Română Simple English Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча 50,000+ articles Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bosanski کوردی Eesti Ελληνικά Frysk Gaeilge Galego Hrvatski ქართული Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių മലയാളം Македонски မြန်မာဘာသာ Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina ไทย తెలుగు اردو Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=1225315602 "

2024 Indian Malayalam crime thriller film Abraham Ozler is a 2024 Indian Malayalam -language crime thriller film co-produced and directed by Midhun Manuel Thomas and written by Randheer Krishnan.    The film stars Jayaram in the titular role alongside Mammootty in extended cameo appearance, Anaswara Rajan , Anoop Menon , Arjun Ashokan , Saiju Kurup , Arya Salim , Senthil Krishna , Jagadish and Dileesh Pothan in supporting roles.  The film revolves around ACP Abraham Ozle's efforts to investigate the death of an IT employee and capture a serial killer, only known as "Birthday Killer". The music was composed by Midhun Mukundan while the cinematography was handled by Theni Eswar and editing by Shameer Muhammed . Abraham Ozler was initially set to be released on 25 December 2023, but the release date was postponed to 11 January 2024. The film received mixed reviews from critics, with praise for its acting, cinematography, direction, and musical score, but criticism for its script. The film earned around ₹ 40.53 crore worldwide, becoming the highest grossing film of Jayara's career.   Plot [ edit ] ACP Abraham Ozler  finds his life shattered when a fake police call lures him away, leading to the brutal death of his wife Maneesha and daughter Jenny. The main culprit is Vineeth, who wanted to avenge Ozler for arresting him in a narcotics case. Vineeth confesses to killing Aneesha and Jenny, cutting them into pieces and burying their body parts somewhere in a forest but claims he does't remember exactly where because he was on a high dosage of drugs.  Ozler gets distraught about his famil's death and struggles to find closure because their bodies are never found. Three years later, Ozler, who is haunted by hallucinations and insomnia , investigates a series of murders with his subordinates SI Divya Sreedharan and Sijo T Venu. The two killers, one driving a pickup truck and the other posing as a surgeon, leave cryptic notes at the crime scenes. They name the killer as "Birthday killer". As the team unravels the connections, they discover Krishnandas, a man using an artificial larynx , as a key suspect. They also learn that Krishnadas, a child prodigy singer, had lost his voice in a failed surgery. Delving into the past, Ozler discovers a shared history among the victi's parents: Shivakumar and Selvaraj were postgraduate medical students at Kozhikode Medical College in 1989. Shivakumar, Selvaraj, a retired police surgeon Xavi Punnoose and Alexander Joseph were all found to have been friends and PG batchmates. They were heard to have gotten into an accident, after which they parted ways. Krishnadas is captured while he kidnaps Alexander. But even as Krishnadas is in Ozle's custody, Xavi is kidnapped. As the truth surfaces, the real Alexander is revealed to be another person. Alexander is arrested as soon as he inflicts the first cut on Xav's body to kill him. Once in custody, Alexander narrates the flashback to Ozler and his team. Alexander was a dedicated PG student at surgery department of Kozhikode Medical College . Xavi, a fellow PG student of surgery, is not as good a surgeon as Alexander, and he is jealous of Alexander. Shivakumar, a PG student of General Medicine, despises Alexander for being in a relationship with a first year MBBS student Suja Jayadev whom Shivakumar had been pursuing. Selvaraj, a PG student of anaesthesia, and a junkie who used to be on drugs even while on duty, was found to use drugs from operation theatre stock by Alexander who then reports this to the college and  Selvaraj is suspended. Professional jealousy of Xavi, fuelled by Shivakumar, led to Xavi orchestrating a failed surgery resulting in Krishnadas losing his voice forever. Alexander reports Xav's intentional act to seniors, and Xavi, as well as Alexander being the first assistant at the surgery, are suspended from college. Xavi is blacklisted by his professors and told he shall never be allowed to do a surgery on a living human being again. Selvaraj, Xavi and Shivakumar then go ahead to severely injure Alexander, leading him into coma. They made up an accident scene, faked injuries on themselves, and told everyone that a drunk Alexander took them for a drive and crashed the car. Alexander lays in a vegetative state for months and Suja goes into deep depression seeing this. One day, doctors suggested that they remove Alexande's life support and allow him to die peacefully. A depressed Suja becomes heartbroken after overhearing this and in a fit of emotion, she commits suicide by jumping in front of a moving bus. In a fateful irony, Alexander survives life support removal and with years and years of nursing care, regains movement, although he had dissociative amnesia, causing him to forget most of the events of his PG time, including Suja and the cruelty done by Xavi and his friends. 3–4 years ago, Alexander sees a TV programme featuring Krishnadas, wherein some old videos of him singing are shown. This triggers his memories and Alexander slowly recollects all the past events. He meets up with Krishnadas who had become wayward after losing his voice, and together they plan the murders. The motive behind the murders were to seek revenge on those who ruined their lives. Back to the present, Xavi meets Alexander and Krishnadas in Ozle's custody and has no remorse at all. Ozler feels very bad in saving Xavi and tells that he needs to die. A surprising turn occurs as Xavi dies on stage at the release ceremony of his autobiography, with forensic surgeon Dr Satheesh Madhavan revealing to Ozler that Alexander had poisoned him with a bacteria-infected surgical ink before making cuts on his body. Later, it is shown that Shivakumar is found dead, and that Selvaraj became an alcoholic and his wife leaves him realising that he caused their so's murder. On his routine visit to Vineeth in prison, Ozler unexpectedly encounters Alexander and Krishnadas in the prison. Alexander cryptically utters " Bone Residue", hinting at an unresolved truth about Ozle's family. Ozler confronts Vineeth, realizing that there is no bone residue on the weapon he allegedly used in the murders. Vineeth challenges Ozler to dig deeper for the truth. Cast [ edit ] Jayaram as ACP Abraham Ozler IPS Mammootty as Dr. Alexander Joseph "Alex" (extended cameo appearance) Adam Sabiq as young Alexander, Suj's boyfriend Anaswara Rajan as Dr. Suja Jayadev, Alexande's girlfriend Arjun Ashokan as Vineeth Anoop Menon as Dr. Satheesh Madhavan Saiju Kurup as Krishnadas PS, Alexande's associate Joseph Mathews as young Krishnadas Arya Salim as SI Divya Sreedharan, Ozle's subordinate Senthil Krishna as SI Sijo T Venu, Ozle's subordinate Jagadish as Dr. Xavi Punnoose Shivaraj as young Xavi Kumarakom Raghunath as Dr. Shivakumar Shiva Hariharan as young Shivakumar Ravi Venkatraman as Selvaraj Shajeer P. Basheer as young Selvaraj Dileesh Pothan as Sudhakaran Payyarath / Dr. Alexander Joseph (Fake) Sai Kumar as Counsellor (cameo) Assim Jamal as DIG Pradeep Rajan IPS Arjun Nandhakumar as Dr. Arun Jayadev, Suj's younger brother Harikrishnan as Naveen Shivakumar Anju Kurian as Aneesha Ozler, Ozle's wife (cameo) Saniya Rafi as Jennifer, Ozle's daughter Aneesh Gopal as SI Sarath Sreeram Ramachandran as speech therapist Darshana Sudarshan Nair as Maya, Navee's wife Krishnaprasad as MRI technician Boban Alummoodan as Dr. Sreedharan Nambiar Prasanth Alexander as Dr. Salam Maala Parvathi as Dr. Annapoorneswari Rajan Thrissur as Raghavan Rini Udayakumar as Raghava's wife Rakesh Pattu as Ashok Selvaraj Mani Shornur as Dr. Zacharia Devendranath as Dr. Eeswaran Potty Lali Marikar as Krishnada's mother Nandan Unni as Mani, ambulance driver Habeeb Thrissur as Dr. Govindaraj Jolly Chirayath as CEO Sasikala Maya Menon as Alexande's mother Sonia Giri as Xav's wife Kala as Shivakuma's wife Maya as Selvara's wife Benyamin as himself (cameo) Production [ edit ] Development [ edit ] After the success of Anjaam Pathira (2020), Midhun Manuel Thomas wanted to direct a film featuring Kunchako Boban. However, the commencement of shooting did't occur due to various reasons. It was during that time that director John Manthrikkal narrated a story to Midhun which was written by ortho surgeon Dr. Randheer Krishnan. He liked the story and decided to direct the film.  In an interview with Anandu Suresh of The Indian Express , Midhun revealed that the fil's titular protagonist was named after the Canadian physician William Osler , regarded as the'Father of Modern Medicin'. He also revealed that he had initially included a backstory, explaining that Abraham Ozle's father, a doctor, named his son after his favorite physician with the hope that Abraham would also become a physician like his father.  The film marked Midhu's return to direction after a four-year hiatus. Meanwhile he had  penned the screenplay for Garudan (2023) and Phoenix (2023).  Casting [ edit ] Midhun approached Jayaram to play the titular role.  Initially, Jayaram was hesitant to commit to the project as he believed that it was unlike any film  he had done till now. He believed it was a heavy character and had to appear in two timelines with different looks.  However, he agreed to play the role as Midhun convinced him. In preparing for the role, Jayaram put in some weight and grew a long beard with a tired look to fit the character.  Abraham Ozler marks Jayara's second Malayalam venture since 2019. There were reports that Mammootty would have a 15-minute cameo appearance in the film which was denied.  Reports suggested that Mammootty would have a screen-time of over 45 minutes in the film, and it was also reported that he would be playing a negative role, which was unconfirmed.  Regarding Mammoott's cameo, Jayaram revealed that Mammootty was not the first choice to play the role of Alexander. The makers approached actors Sathyaraj , R. Sarathkumar , Prakash Raj , and others.  Midhun said that, when he narrated the story of Abraham Ozler to Mammootty, he liked the script and asked him if he could play the antagonist.  Midhun was apprehensive about casting Mammootty. However, Jayaram convinced him to give the role to Mammootty.  Midhun met Mammootty again, who consented to play the role of Alexander.  Filming [ edit ] The project was announced on 19 May 2023.  Principal photography began on 20 May 2023 in Mission Quarters in Thrissur .  Producer Irshad M. Hassan performed the switch-on ceremony.  The first scene was reportedly shot between Jayaram and Sai Kumar.  Apart from Thrissur, Palakkad , Coimbatore , Idukki and Wayanad were the other shooting locations.  The filming wrapped up on 14 November 2023.  Music [ edit ] The fil's music was composed by Midhun Mukundan . It consists of one track, Poomaname , from the 1985 film Nirakkoottu . The track was originally composed by Shyam and the lyrics were written by Poovachal Khader . The song was sung by Nitin K. Siva, while the original song was by K. S. Chithra , G. Venugopal and K. G. Markose . Release [ edit ] Theatrical [ edit ] The film was initially scheduled to release on 25 December 2023, on the occasion of Christmas.  The release date was postponed to 11 January 2024 to avoid a clash with other major Christmas releases.  The film was released in North America on 12 January 2024. Home media [ edit ] Abraham Ozler is released in Disney+ Hotstar on 20 March 2024 and it will also be available in Hindi , Tamil , Telugu and Kannada languages. Reception [ edit ] Critical response [ edit ] Gopika IS of The Times of India gave 3/5 stars and wrote "Jayaram starrer Abraham Ozler turned out to be an interesting watch and can undoubtedly be seen as a new phase in the acto's career."  Sara Anna Eepan of The Week gave 3/5 stars and wrote "Abraham Ozler is worth a watch on the big screen for those interested in an investigation drama with medical thriller elements."  Sajin Shrijith of The New Indian Express gave 3/5 stars and wrote "Abraham Ozler does't lack the ability to hook us, but it made me wonder whether it woul've worked better as an airport novel than a film."  Nikhil Sebastian of Pinkvilla gave 2.5/5 stars and wrote "Abraham Ozler falls into the category of another half-baked thriller, relying on the performances of the actors and a brilliant original score."  Anandu Suresh of The Indian Express gave 2.5/5 stars and wrote "Midhun Manuel Thoma' film can be dubbed as a crime thriller that meets the essential criteria for the genre. However, determining whether it has done a good job requires more than a simple yes/no answer."  S. R. Praveen of The Hindu wrote "The Jayaram-starrer is marred by generic treatment to the serial killer genre, with a cameo from superstar Mammootty offering only a temporary relief."  Vishal Menon of FIlm Companion wrote "By reinventing Jayaram as an actor and by infusing so much information into a stereotypical thriller, Abraham Ozler remains fairly engaging even if yo've seen it all before."  Princy Alexander of Onmanorama wrote "The initial feeling of repetitiveness affects the thrills in the first half. However, true to the expression "to end with a bang," Midhun employs the right tactics in the second half to provide viewers with a more than satisfactory conclusion."  Box office [ edit ] Abraham Ozler grossed ₹28.8 million from the Kerala and ₹60 million worldwide, on its opening day.  The film grossed ₹2.34 crore on its second day, with worldwide gross exceeding ₹10 crore.  Abraham Ozler grossed ₹2.9 crore on its third day and ₹3.19 crore on its first Sunday. The film grossed around ₹11.31 crore in its first four days from Kerala.  The film grossed a total of $61,616 from the North America in the first weekend.  The film grossed ₹1.4 crore on its fifth day from the Kerala.  The film grossed a total of ₹150 million in its first 8 days from Kerala. The film grossed a total of ₹31 million in its second weekend at Kerala. The film grossed a total of $1.36 million (approx Rs. 113 million) from 11 days at the UAE and GCC box office, while it grossed ₹17 million from ROI circuits in 11 days. In North America, the film grossed $130K in UK and Europe it grossed $150K and in Australia $17K in 11 days at the box office.   In 16 days, the film grossed more than ₹20 crore from Kerala and became the first commercially successful Malayalam film of 2024.

Welcome to Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit . 6,849,038 articles in English From toda's featured article DeLancey W. Gill (1859–1940) was an American drafter , landscape painter , and photographer. As a teenager, he moved in with an aunt in Washington, D.C. , after his mother and stepfather traveled west. He eventually found himself employed as an architectural draftsman for the Treasury . He created sketches and watercolor paintings of the city, with a particular focus on the still-undeveloped rural and poorer areas of the district. While working as an illustrator for the Smithsonian's Bureau of American Ethnology in the 1890s, he was appointed as the agenc's photographer without prior photographic training. He took portrait photographs that circulated widely of thousands of Native American delegates to Washington, including notable figures such as Chief Joseph and Geronimo . These photographs have come under modern criticism for his frequent use of props and clothing, sometimes outdated or inauthentic, given to the delegates. ( Full article... ) Recently featured: Oceanic whitetip shark RoboCop Tales of Monkey Island Archive By email More featured articles About Did you know ... Yevhen Klopotenko ... that Yevhen Klopotenko (pictured) fought a "war for borscht "? ... that a street in San Francisco was named after a man who used a false identity ? ... that Alfie Templeman described the style of his studio album Radiosoul as "incohesively cohesive"? ... that Rosemary Miller won her stat's skeet shooting championship one year after learning the sport, and then won a state shooting championship in all but two years for the rest of her life? ... that the Japanese boy band Nexz was created through the program Nizi Project season 2 ? ... that the Nazi collaborator Sebastiaan de Ranitz abandoned his office following Mad Tuesday , leaving his department in turmoil? ... that Gedling Town F.C.'s nickname "The Ferrymen" was inspired by the name of a pub located next to the tea's stadium? ... that Antonio Dini was the only survivor of a three-man crew after he crashed a plane into the sea, but had no recollection of the crash due to concussion? ... that after a pigeon sculpture in Wellington went missing, members of the public created a memorial for it? Archive Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Keir Starmer The New Popular Front wins the most seats in the National Assembly in the French legislative election but does not achieve a majority . The Labour Party wins the United Kingdom general election and Keir Starmer (pictured) becomes prime minister. Hurricane Beryl , the earliest-recorded Category 5 Atlantic hurricane in a calendar year, leaves at least 15 people dead in the Caribbean , Venezuela, and the United States. In the Netherlands, a new cabinet is sworn in, with Dick Schoof serving as the prime minister . Ongoing : Israel–Hamas war timeline Russian invasion of Ukraine timeline Sudanese civil war timeline Recent deaths : Jane McAlevey Rick Cluff Martti Wallén Audrey Flack Ismail Kadare Hugh Aldons Nominate an article On this day July 10 : Independence Day in the Bahamas ( 1973 ) Martin Luther King Jr. 1645 – English Civil War : The Parliamentarians destroyed the last Royalist field army at the Battle of Langport , ultimately giving Parliament control of the west of England. 1942 – An American naval aviator discovered a downed Japanese Mitsubishi A6M Zero on Akutan Island , Alaska, which was later rebuilt and flown to devise tactics against the aircraft during World War II. 1966 – Martin Luther King Jr. (pictured) led a rally in support of the Chicago Freedom Movement , one of the most ambitious civil-rights campaigns in the northern United States. 1999 – The United States defeated China in the final match of the third FIFA Wome's World Cup , setting records in both attendance and television ratings for wome's sports. 2006 – Typhoon Ewiniar made landfall in South Korea, causing damages across the country amounting to 2.06 trillion won (US$1.4 billion). Arthur Annesley, 1st Earl of Anglesey ( b. 1614) Eva Ekeblad ( b. 1724) Bobo Brazil ( b. 1924) Calogero Vizzini ( d. 1954) More anniversaries: July 9 July 10 July 11 Archive By email List of days of the year Toda's featured picture Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – The central hub for editors, with resources, links, tasks, and announcements. Village pump – Forum for discussions about Wikipedia itself, including policies and technical issues. Site news – Sources of news about Wikipedia and the broader Wikimedia movement. Teahouse – Ask basic questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Help desk – Ask questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Reference desk – Ask research questions about encyclopedic topics. Content portals – A unique way to navigate the encyclopedia. Wikipedi's sister projects Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation , a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects : Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning tools Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English . Many other Wikipedias are available ; some of the largest are listed below. 1,000,000+ articles العربية مصرى Deutsch Español فارسی ‎ Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 250,000+ articles Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gú Български Català Čeština Dansk Esperanto Euskara עברית Հայերեն 한국어 Magyar Norsk bokmål Română Simple English Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча 50,000+ articles Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bosanski کوردی Eesti Ελληνικά Frysk Gaeilge Galego Hrvatski ქართული Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių മലയാളം Македонски မြန်မာဘာသာ Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina ไทย తెలుగు اردو Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=1225315602 "

2024 Indian film by Lijo Jose Pellissery Malaikottai Vaaliban ( transl. Youngster from the Mountain Fort) is a 2024 Indian Malayalam -language epic action drama film  directed by Lijo Jose Pellissery and written by P. S. Rafeeque from a story by Pellissery. The film stars Mohanlal in a dual role , alongside Sonalee Kulkarni , Hareesh Peradi , Danish Sait , Manoj Moses, Katha Nandi and Manikandan R. Achari in supporting roles. It was jointly produced by John & Mary Creative , Century Films , Maxlab Cinemas and Entertainments , Saregama and Amen Movie Monastery . The music was handled by Prashant Pillai , while the editing and cinematography were handled by Deepu S. Joseph and Madhu Neelakandan respectively. Pellissery wrote the initial story during the COVID-19 pandemic and later expanded it to a narrative that transcends time and space. He worked with P. S. Rafeeque for the development of the script. The announcement of the film happened on 25 October 2022 by Shibu Baby John marking the first collaboration between Pellissery and Mohanlal. Tinu Pappachan served as the associate director. Principal photography spanned approximately 130 days from January to June 2023, covering locations in Rajasthan , Chennai , and Pondicherry . Malaikottai Vaaliban was released in theatres worldwide on 25 January 2024, coinciding with the Republic Day weekend. The film received mixed reviews from critics and audiences alike, who praised the cinematography, art direction, production values and performances (especially that of Mohanlal), while criticism was aimed at the direction, screenplay, editing and fight sequences. The film was a box office bomb . Plot [ edit ] Malaikottai Vaaliban, an undefeated aged drifting warrior, establishes himself as a hero reigning over a vast desert region. Vaaliban travels with mentor/father figure, Ayyanar, and his son, Chinnappaiyyan, who energizes the crowd with drums and chants during Vaaliba's arena fights. Vaaliban is an orphan, whom Ayyanar had adopted when he was a newborn from the hands of his deceased mother. Vaaliban proceeds to Adivaarithur for his next fight, where they encounter a lady named Jamanthipoovu, who limps in front of them and requests for a ride on their cart since she cannot walk. Chinnappaiyyan and Ayyanar agree to take her with them and she accompanies them on their journey. In Adivaarithur, Vaaliban defeats the reigning champion following the customary practice of claiming the ex-champio's house and wife as his own house and wife. After a brief stay there, Vaaliban encounters a dancer , Rangapattinam Rangarani, at a betting parlour in Nooraanathalayur. Vaaliban also clashes with Chamathakan, blocking his advances. Angered and humiliated, Chamathakan challenges Vaaliban to a fight in his village, Mangodu, against their most powerful fighter, Mangottu Mallan. The next morning, Vaaliban arrives at Mangodu to fight him. Despite Chamathaka's famil's deceitful tactics, Vaaliban emerges victorious, stripping them of their honor. In retaliation, Chamathakan embarks on a killing spree out of shame, seeking revenge against Vaaliban. Meanwhile, Vaaliban returns to Ambathoor Malaikottai, where he began his journey, and challenges the Portuguese fighter king, Macaulay Maharaj, to take over his reign. However, Chamathakan, seeking vengeance, poisons Vaaliban before the fight with Maharaj and surprisingly Lady Macaulay as a duo, temporarily blinding him, which leads to him being captured by the Portuguese soldiers. Miraculously, he recovers the next day and defeats the Portuguese, with the help of the slaves of Ambathoor, who were liberated by Rangaran's aid, Thenamma. Later that night, outside of Malaikottai, Rangarani proposes to Vaaliban, who rejects her proposal and tells her that he cannot love anyone. Hearing this, she becomes heartbroken and reveals this to Thenamma, who starts scheming evil things in her mind and promises to help her make Vaaliban fall in love with her. Celebrating their victory, they all stop for the Thiruchenthooru festival, where Jamanthi reveals to Vaaliban that she is pregnant with Chinnappaiyya's child. He is overjoyed when he hears this and wishes good health and prosperity to the child and Jamanthi. Rangarani eavesdrops and hears the conversation, but misunderstands the chil's father to be Vaaliban, judging by the way Vaaliban spoke to Jamanthi. Rangarani reports this to Thenamma, who puts her plan in action. She speaks to Chinnappaiyyan and tells him that Jamanthi is pregnant with Vaaliba's child, which angers him and sets out to kill Vaaliban. During the temple festivities, while they are all celebrating, Vaaliban senses Chamathaka's presence in the crowd and attempts to find Chamathakan, but in vain. Vaaliban senses that he might be near Jamanthi and races towards her to protect her, but due to the huge crowd present there, Vaaliban is not able to make it in time and he kills her. While mourning Jamanth's death, Vaaliban senses Chamathaka's presence in the crowd once again. He sees a person coming to attack him and stabs the person multiple times. Though Vaaliban thinks that he has killed Chamathakan, it is revealed to be Chinnappaiyyan, whom Vaaliban could not recognise as they were all wearing face masks. Chamathakan considers his revenge fulfilled and leaves the area. These events drive a wedge between Vaaliban and Ayyanar. Ayyanar pledges vengeance and declares him as his sworn enemy. While wandering away, Ayyanar comes across Chamathakan and they share a drink. He reveals to Chamathakan that Vaaliban is not an orphan as he was previously made to believe, but the son of his mutant fighter rival, Malaivettai Vaaliban. Malaivettai had defeated Ayyanar and took his wife with him, as a result of which, he unfortunately became Malaivetta's servant. Soon, Ayyana's ex-wife became pregnant with Vaaliban; Malaivettai left her to conquer the world, leaving her under the care of Ayyanar in the monsoon season. As soon as he was born, Ayyanar murdered his ex-wife and abducted him to train him as a weapon against his own biological father. Ayyanar poisons Chamathakan and wanders off into the desert. The film ends with the revelation of Ayyanar revealing that the fighter, which he will bring to fight against Vaaliban will be his own father, paving way for the sequel. Cast [ edit ] Mohanlal in a dual role as: Malaikottai Vaaliban Malayan Sonalee Kulkarni as Rangapattinam Rangarani (voice dubbed by Grace Antony ) Hareesh Peradi as Ayyanar Danish Sait as Chamathakan Manoj Moses as Chinnappayyan Katha Nandi as Jamanthipoovu (voice dubbed by Parvathy) Manikandan R. Achari as Adima Hariprashanth M G as Kelu Mallan Shanta Dhananjayan as Ponnurumi Veeramma Sanjana Chandran as Thenamma Harikrishnan S. as Mangottu Mallan Suchithra Nair as Madhangi Andrea Ravera as Macaulay Maharaj Diana Nasonova as Lady Macaulay Rajeev Pillai as Bodyguard Deepali Vashistha as Dancer Murugan Martin as Slave Krishnankutti Nair Shivakumar Sopanam as translator Production [ edit ] Development [ edit ] Malaikkotai Vaalibhan is the first collaboration of Lijo Jose Pellissery and Mohanlal . On 25 October 2022, John & Mary Creative , the newly launched production house of former minister Shibu Baby John , announced their debut film which brought together director Lijo Jose Pellissery and actor Mohanlal for the first time.   The title was announced on 22 December. At that time, media reported that the film is a period drama in which Mohanlal portrays the role of a wrestler.  The screenplay was written by P. S. Rafeeque . Pellissery retained most of the technical crew from his previous films. Tinu Pappachan was appointed as the associate director.  The film credits Shibu Baby John and Achu Baby John from John & Mary Creative, Kochumon Century from Century Films , Jacob K. Babu from Maxlab Cinemas and Entertainments , and Vikram Mehra and Siddharth Anand Kumar from Yoodlee Films as producers.  Additionally, Pellisser's Amen Movie Monastery also joined the production.  Pellissery conceived the initial story during the COVID-19 lockdown and later expanded it into a narrative that blurs time and space. He collaborated with Rafeeque to develop the screenplay. Pellissery chose him for his belief that Rafeeque could contribute to a language and vocabulary "rooted in the soil". The film was originally planned in Tamil . In the scripting process, Pellissery transformed the concept into a broader canvas, particularly in terms of characters and landscape. He drew inspirations from around the world, incorporating elements from Japanese folklore and Samurai culture to Westerns , among other sources.  According to John, Malaikottai Vaaliban is a "complete action cinema".  Mohanlal stated that the film is crafted in the style of a Western film , and the storyline is not confined to any specific time period.  The narrative unfolds in its own world , transcending space and time, blending philosophical and spiritual elements. The film allows for individual interpretations, with Mohanlal stating, "each viewe's perspective would be as diverse and unique as strokes of a painting". Additionally, he suggested that it could also be perceived as a cinematic zen story.  Pelissery added that the film is without any particular genre and can be perceived as a cinematic rendition of an Amar Chitra Katha .  According to producer Siddharth Anand Kumar, "it is the kind of epic story we have grown up reading", it may look like a mythological story, "but it is outside of the mythological space".  Casting [ edit ] Commenting on Mohanla's casting, Pellisserry emphasized that, "this is a period film which demanded someone with the gravitas of Mohanlal".  Describing the character, Mohanlal said that there is an anonymity surrounding Vaaliban, as he can be anyone and possess any ability.  In November 2022, the team entered into discussions with actress Radhika Apte for the lead female role, according to reports.  There were also reports of Vidyut Jammwal and Rajpal Yadav being considered for roles in the film.  In December, Kannada actor and stand-up comedian Danish Sait confirmed that he would make his Malayalam cinema debut in the film, growing a beard for his role, which contrasts with his typical clean-shaven appearance.  Sai's character was designed to emulate the traits of a hyena , a concept developed during discussions between Mohanlal and Pellisery.  Sait underwent specific preparations for his role. He was asked to watch hyena videos to capture the characte's behaviour and laughter.  In the film, he spots a half-shaven head and beard look.  Sait himself dubbed his voice in Malayalam, Hindi , Kannada , and Tamil language versions of the film. He was first considered for another Pellissery film, which was postponed, prior to his casting in Malaikottai Vaaliban .  Marathi actress Sonalee Kulkarni also made her Malayalam debut with the film, describing it as a "musical period drama".  She plays Rangapattinam Rangarani, an actress and dancer. Pellissery discovered Kulkarni from a Marathi film, Natarang (2010), where she played a lavani dancer, which she performs in Malaikottai Vaaliban as well. Describing her character, Kulkarni said that Rangarani has "a touch of Maharashtra " but comes from somewhere else; her outfit and looks are a fusion of many Indian cultures, "there is far too much diversity in this film because every character, not just Rangarani, is from distinct lands".  In January 2023, reports suggested that the team was in talks with Tamil actors Kamal Haasan and Jiiva for two brief roles.  It was later reported that Haasan declined the role as he wanted to focus on his work in Indian 2 .  Kannada actor Rishab Shetty dismissed reports about his casting, clarifying that although he was approached for a role, he turned down the role in favor of a Kannada film .  In the turn of events, Mohanlal himself was cast in a second role that unfolds during the fil's climax, originally considered for either Haasan or Shetty.  Malayali dancer Manoj Moses secured an important role,  as did Bengali actress Katha Nandi, who described her part as a "strong female character".  Moses was cast because Pellissery wanted someone who knows acrobatics , having noticed him in his unreleased debut film, Moonwalk .  Hariprashanth Varm's character look came out as location pictures in February 2023.  Sanjana Chandran, a dancer and transwoman, secured a role in the cast and made her acting debut.  Television actress Suchitra Nair was cast by Pellissery after he spotted her on the Malayalam reality TV show Bigg Boss (season 4) , marking her film debut.  Hareesh Peradi , Manikandan R. Achari , and Rajeev Pillai was also cast in undisclosed roles.  Bharatanatyam dancer Shanta Dhananjayan plays a kalaripayattu gurukkal in the film.  Deepali Vashistha, a belly dancer was also cast in the film.  Russian yoga teacher, dancer, and model Diana Nasonova played another role.  Filming [ edit ] Jaisalmer was a major location. Principal photography for the film began with a customary pooja function on 18 January 2023 in Jaisalmer , Rajasthan . Madhu Neelakandan was the cinematographer.  The majority of the film was shot in Rajasthan .  The production was relocated to Pokhran , Rajasthan on 24 February for further shooting.  After a span of 77 days, the schedule in Rajasthan was completed by the first week of April.  The second schedule was planned at Sree Gokulam Film Studios in Chennai .  It was charted to last 40 days.  The schedule began in early May, utilising sets built for the film.  The film used more than 1500 extras on set.  In addition to Chennai, filming also took place in Pondicherry . The second schedule lasted 50 days. Filming was wrapped on 13 June 2023.  The film in its entirety was completed in approximately 130 days shooting.  Stunts were choreographed by Vikram Mor and Supreme Sundar.  Music [ edit ] The fil's original background score and songs were composed, arranged and programmed by Prashant Pillai , a regular collaborator of Pellissery. Screenwriter P. S. Rafeeque also contributed the lyrics for all songs, except "Madabhare Naina" by Preeti Pillai and "Shabnami" by Varun Grover . The initial composition of four songs—"Punnara Kattile Poovanatthil", "Raakk", "Thaayum", and "Ezhimala Kottayile"—were done by Rafeeque. The soundtrack album, distributed by the record label Saregama , was preceded with three singles: "Punnara Kattile Poovanatthil",  "Raakk"  and "Madabhara Mizhiyoram".  The full album was released on 18 January 2024, which includes Malayalam and Hindi songs.  Marketing [ edit ] Following the unveiling of the fil's first-look poster in April 2023, a limited edition of 25 physical metal posters, autographed by Mohanlal and Pellissery, along with a digital collectible in the form of an NFT , verified through the Polygon blockchain were auctioned.    It received bids from over 30 countries.  In November 2023, the makers of the film collaborated with a United Kingdom-based company to release a DNFT (Decentralized Non-Fungible Token) of Malaikottai Vaaliban , offering an alternative to the centralised NFT.  In December 2023, a book titled The Making of Malaikottai Vaaliban , authored by Toby T. Arnold, was published in both paperback and Kindle editions. The book provides a detailed account of the behind-the-scenes work that went into the production of Malaikottai Vaaliban .  In the second week of January 2024, the makers released a childre's comic book titled Vaaliban Comix , featuring the character of Malaikottai Vaaliban as a superhero coming to the rescue of children in distress.  On 18 January 2024, the producers collaborated with Jain International School of Creative Arts and Manorama Online to organize a strongman competition called the "Strongman Challenge" at Bolgatty Palace , Kochi . Two distinct competitions were held, one for professional bodybuilders , powerlifters and weightlifters and another for sports enthusiasts in the general category. The winners were bestowed with the title of Mr. Vaaliban along with a cash prize. This event marked the first ever occurrence of a strongman competition in Kerala .  The European distributor RFT Films organized various events in the United Kingdom under the name of Vaaliban Festival, including fan meets and club nights.  An audio launch function was held on 19 January in Kochi, attended by the cast and crew.  It was telecast on Flowers TV . The fil's promotional materials were installed inside airport terminals . The makers partnered with the online food ordering and delivery platform Swiggy to promote the film among their customers in Kerala, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu . It was the first time a Malayalam film was promoted through food delivery apps.  Release [ edit ] Theatrical [ edit ] In June 2023, John mentioned that although they had not finalized a release date, the film can be expected by the end of 2023.  In September, it was announced that the film would be released in theatres worldwide on 25 January 2024, coinciding with the Republic Day weekend. Beside Malayalam, the film would be dubbed and released in Hindi , Kannada , Telugu , and Tamil languages.  Mohanla's voice was dubbed by director Anurag Kashyap in the Hindi dubbed version of the film.  The dubbed versions are scheduled to be released in theatres on 2 February 2024.  Home media [ edit ] The film was premiered on Disney+ Hotstar from 23 February 2024 in Malayalam and dubbed versions of Tamil, Telugu, Hindi and Kannada languages.  Reception [ edit ] Critical reception [ edit ] Malaikottai Vaaliban received mixed reviews from critics. Sanjith Sridharan of OTTplay gave 4/5 stars and concluded, "Lijo Jose Pellisser's Malaikottai Vaaliban is a movie made keeping in minds fans of cinema – and not that of a superstar. With action and enough entertainment to keep the audience of the commercial cinema hooked, this visually-rich Malayalam period drama is another great addition to Lij's filmography and presents a memorable character for Mohanlal, who is in top form".  Arun Antony of Deccan Herald gave 4/5 stars and wrote  "Lijo impresses with a fictional period drama. The film offers a glimpse of what Lijo will bring to the table next but may not cater to Mohanlal fans seeking action and powerful dialogues."  S. Devasankar of Pinkvilla gave 3/5 stars and wrote, "Malaikottai Vaaliban is indeed a bold attempt in the fantasy genre by Lijo Jose Pellissery, a director known to keep experimenting with his films. Despite its flaws, Malaikottai Vaaliban is worth watching in theaters, especially for Madhu Neelakanda's cinematography and Prashant Pilla's music".  Gopika Is of The Times of India rated 3/5 stars and wrote "Lijo Jose Pellisher's Malaikottai Vaaliban is a mixed bag of swift and interesting action scenes, epic frames, peppy songs and quite some lag in the first half. While the basic story line, when you take Valiban out of the equation is't very original or even well defined, there are very interesting elements adding layers to it."  Anandu Suresh of The Indian Express gave 3/5 stars and stated, "Unlike Mohanla's recent films, where makers often got carried away by either his stardom or his potential as a performer, Lijo Jose Pellisser's multi-genre movie strikes a fine balance between these aspects, while striving not to compromise on its overall quality".  K. Janaki of India Today gave 2.5/5 stars and wrote, 'Malaikottai Vaaliba' could have been a crisp film had the narrative had enough meat in the first half. However, the film sets up a great segue for the second part".  Sajin Shrijith of The New Indian Express gave 2/5 stars and wrote "A tiresome visual extravaganza with few joys. Lijo Jose Pellisser's new film is simply put, a movie with the sensibility of an elaborate play."  Nirmal Jovial of The Week gave 1.5/5 stars and wrote "Pellissery decided to create a film that is purposefully made slow. It is unlikely that this film will satisfy either of the [Mohanlal and Pellissery]fans."  Latha Srinivasan of Hindustan Times termed Mohanla's performance as the backbone of this fantasy entertainer and wrote "Called a fantasy entertainer, there are elements that work in Malaikottai Vaaliban and elements that clearly do't. Expect the unexpected".  Arjun Menon of Film Companion wrote "Lijo Jose Pellissery breaks down an epic her's journey tha's not afraid to breathe and take its own daring formal liberties. And this makes it a theatre experience unlike anything you would get to see on the big screen this year".  Sowmya Rajendran of The News Minute stated that the film is like a "comic book style adventure film" and told that the film is "visually rich but underwhelming".  Princy Alexander of Onmanorama wrote "There are times when Lijo tries to tell the story through the frames alone, which affects the storytelling. But rest assured, there are some twists that make the film worth the experience and eager for a second part."  S. R. Praveen of The Hindu wrote "Filmmaker Lijo Jose Pellissery tries something new with the Mohanlal-starrer, and the cinephile in him is on ample display with nods to yesteryear classics, but what we are finally left with is an underwhelmed feeling".  Analysing the movie for Onmanorama , Sajesh Mohan wrote about how Lijo used colours to narrate different stages of his folklore, "Lij's colour-coding in ‘Malaikottai Vaaliban’ adds an intriguing dimension. When Vaaliba's combat is primarily physical, colours are gradually introduced until they culminate in red and black. However, when Vaaliban faces a group of treacherous adversaries driven by jealousy, the dominant colour becomes yellow."  Box office [ edit ] Malaikottai Vaaliban debuted by collecting ₹ 5.85 crore in Kerala and with additional earnings from overseas and GCC, the film amassed a total gross collection of ₹ 12.27 crore on its opening day, securing its place as the fourth highest opening grosser among Mohanla's films.  As of 30 January 2024, the film grossed ₹21.75 crore.  By 8 February 2024, the film grossed ₹28.40 crore.  and by 13 February 2024, the fil's estimated gross was ₹30 crore.  Future [ edit ] In the third week of January 2024, it was reported that Malaikottai Vaaliban is designed as a two-part film and would be followed by a second film.  When asked, Pellissery commented that, "we hope we can give you more surprises once the film releases".  A sequel titled Malaikottai Vaaliban II was announced in the end credits of the film.

Indian politician Shibu Baby John (born 27 July 1963) is an Indian politician, businessman, film producer and former Minister for Labour  of the State Government of Kerala , India.  He is former  General Secretary of the stat's Revolutionary Socialist Party (Baby John) party, which is based in Kerala. Now RSP (Baby John) merged with Revolutionary Socialist Party and he is now national committee member of RSP. In 21 February 2023, he was elected the Secretary of Revolutionary Socialist Party Kerala State Committee.  He is the son of former RSP leader Baby John and Annamma John.  Personal life [ edit ] Shibu married Annie Constantine, a civil engineering graduate from TKM College of Engineering ,  on 17 January 1988  and the couple have two children. He graduated with a B.Tech. from TKM College of Engineering , Kollam . After his studies he ventured into the export business. In the 2001 Indian assembly elections he contested in Chavara constituency on the RSP ticket and won. Chavara constituency is known for having supported Baby John for decades. [ citation needed ] He left the RSP and launched the Revolutionary Socialist Party (Baby John) in 2005. In the 2006 assembly election he lost to N.K. Premachandran of the RSP. In the 2011 assembly election he defeated then state minister N.K. Premachandran with a lead of 6061 votes in the Chavara constituency, and was sworn in as a minister on 23 May 2011.  But in 2014, both leaders merged their parties together, and this allowed Premachandran to join UDF and to pay way to Lok Sabha in the elections which soon followed. In 2016, he was defeated by Vijayan Pillai of Communist Marxist Party (CMP) Aravindakshan Fraction who is former panchayath member and district panchayath member of Chavara and son of veteran RSP leader N. Narayana Pillai.

Indian film producer (c.1937–2019) Raju Mathew ( c. 1937 – 12 November 2019) was an Indian film producer from Kerala . He produced 45 films.  He was the owner of Century Films.  Biography [ edit ] Mathew worked in an insurance company before coming to the film arena. Later he gave up the job and established Century Films in 1979.  Then he began to produce films. He produced mainly Malayalam films . Besides Malayalam films he also produced a Hindi film titled Anokha Rishta .  Athiran was the last film which was produced by him.  He was the president of the Kerala Film Chamber of Commerce.  Mathew was married to Lily Mathew.  Anjana Jacob and Ranjana Mathew are their daughters.  Mathew died on 12 November 2019 at the age of 82.   Selected filmography [ edit ] Malayalam [ edit ] Kelkkaatha Sabdham (1982)  Karyam Nissaram (1983)  Pinnilavu (1983)  Sandhyakku Virinja Poovu (1983)  Athirathram (1984)  Adiyozhukkukal (1984)  Aalkkoottathil Thaniye (1984)  Ariyatha Veethikal (1984)  Sreekrishna Parunthu (1988)  Avidathe Pole Ivideyum (1985)  Karimpinpoovinakkare (1985)  Anubandham (1985)  Nammukku Parkan Munthiri Thoppukal (1986)  Adimakal Udamakal (1987)  Vrutham (1987)  Mukthi (1988)  Aryan (1988)  Shubhayathra (1990)  Aanaval Mothiram (1991)  Samooham (1993)  Puthran (1994)  Thanmathra (2005)  Money Ratnam (2014)  Athiran (2019)  Hindi [ edit ] Anokha Rishta (1986)  Awards [ edit ] 2005 - National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Malayalam (producer) - Thanmathra  2005 - Kerala State Film Award for Best Film (producer) - Thanmathra  2005 - Amrita TV Film Award for Best Film (producer) - Thanmathra 1985 - Filmfare Award for Best Film – Malayalam for Aalkkoottathil Thaniye

Indian film production and distribution company Maxlab Cinemas and Entertainments is an Indian film distribution and production company established in 2009 by actor-producer Mohanlal , producer Antony Perumbavoor and industrialist K. C. Babu. Since then, it has distributed several films in Malayalam and other Indian languages. The company is a regular distributor of films produced by Aashirvad Cinemas and Tamil films.    Filmography [ edit ] See also [ edit ] Aashirvad Cinemas Mohanlal Antony Perumbavoor

Indian music record label company Saregama India Ltd. ,  formerly known as The Gramophone Company of India Ltd. , is India's oldest music label company, owned by the RP-Sanjiv Goenka Group of companies.   The company is listed on the NSE and the BSE with its head office located in Kolkata and other offices in Mumbai , Chennai and Delhi . Apart from music, Saregama also produces films under the brand name Yoodlee Films and multi-language television content.  Saregama also retails a music-based hardware platform called Carvaan.  Saregama owns music repertoire across film music, non-film music, Carnatic , Hindustani classical , devotional music, etc. in over 25 Indian languages . The first song recorded in India by Gauhar Jaan in 1902 and the first film made in Bollywood ‘ Alam Ara' in 1931 were under the music label. [ citation needed ]  Saregama purveyor of Carnatic, Hindustani classical, devotional music also promotes dance music like Madhuban mein Radhika Nache . Saregama holds the rights of 61 movies and over 6000 hours of TV content. With increasing focus in the new music space, Saregama has been cementing its position with new film and non-film acquisitions across Hindi, Tamil, Telugu, Bhojpuri, Gujarati, Punjabi and other regional languages.  The music catalogue of Saregama is officially available across various domains for audiences to consume. This includes over-the-top (OTT) music streaming apps ( Spotify , Gaana , Wynk , YouTube Music , Hungama ,  Resso, Apple Music , Tidal , Pandora , Napster , GP Music,  BL Vibe etc.), broadcasting platforms ( Star network , Sony Tv Network , Viacom 18 , India TV , Zee , Sun TV Network , etc.), OTT video streaming platforms ( Netflix , Amazon Prime , Disney Plus Hotstar , Zee 5 , Alt Balaji , Sony Liv , Chorki , Bioscope etc.) and social media platforms ( Instagram , YouTube , Facebook , Josh , Moj, Triller ).    Many Hindi films in recent times have their music on Saregama. These include Kahaani 2 , 102 Not Out , Ek Ladki Ko Dekha Toh Aisa Laga , Total Dhamaal and Panga , among others.  The company has also signed as the official music label for forthcoming films like Bell Bottom , Gangubai Kathiawad , Kurup , Maidaan and the untitled next film of Ranveer Singh with director Shankar .   In the Punjab music space, Saregama has a catalogue of over 8000 tracks.   Over 11,800 tracks are available in the library.  Saregama owns all the songs of MS Subbulakshmi , the first singer to win Indi's highest civilian award, Bharat Ratna.  In the Telugu space, Saregama has over 8000 tracks.    Saregama has an extensive collection of Malayalam music with over 7000 tracks of both film and non-film music.  Saregama has a collection of over 3000 songs of Kannada film and non-film music.  Saregama has over 26,000 tracks in Bengali, including over 7900 Rabindra Sangeet and 1500 Nazrul Geeti .  Saregama has over 6000 film and non-film Marathi tracks.    Saregama has over 920 songs in Bhojpuri in their catalogue.  In the space of Gujarati music, Saregama has over 2900 film and non-film tracks.  Saregama also has over 1400 tracks each in Odia and Assamese, comprising both of film and non-film tracks.  Saregama also has a devotional catalogue with over 18,300 tracks, spanning Hindu devotional tracks, Gurbani, Islamic tracks and Christian devotional tracks. [ citation needed ]  It also has an extensive folk music collection spanning folk songs in Bengali, Punjabi, Marathi, and Gujarati. [ citation needed ]  History [ edit ] The Gramophone and Typewriter Ltd. [ edit ] In 1901, the company began operations by recording the first song in India, as the first overseas branch of the Gramophone Company ( EMI from 1931).   It was incorporated in Calcutta (now Kolkata) as The Gramophone and Typewriter Ltd. The following year, Gramophone inventor Emile Berliner's assistant Fred Gaisberg came to India "on a mission to capture  music". Gauhar Jaan became the first Indian artist to be recorded there, on 5 January 1902. In 1907, a record factory was started in Dum Dum in Calcutta, the first outside UK.  The Gramophone Co. [ edit ] On 13 August 1946, it was incorporated as a Private Limited company with the name of ‘The Gramophone Co. (India) Limite'. It was converted into a public company on 28 October 1968 and consequently the name of the company was changed to ‘The Gramophone Company of India Limite'.  RPG Group took over the company in 1985 from EMI when the compan's financial health was poor. Saregama India [ edit ] The name of the company was then changed from The Gramophone Company of India Limited to its current name, Saregama India Limited , on 3 November 2000. In 2005, the remaining EMI stake was sold off to the parent company. Saregama Carvaan, a multipurpose portable music player launched in November 2018. Dum Dum Recording Studio [ edit ] Saregam's recording studio, called Dum Dum studio , was built in 1928 in Calcutta.  It is one of the oldest studios in Southeast Asia . Nobel Laureate Rabindranath Tagore had recorded his songs and poems in his own voice at this studio. Rebel poet Kazi Nazrul Islam's voice was also recorded here. The Dum Dum Recording studio was also a house to manufacturing and production of Gramophone Records and thereafter Music Cassettes .  With advent of digital formats, the physical formats progressively went out of consumer patronage and consequently, these manufacturing facilities were shut down. Brands [ edit ] HMV [ edit ] For the first 100 years, the company retailed its products (records, cassettes, CDs) under the brand name HMV ( His Maste's Voice )  which was synonymous with film music in India. From 2000 onwards, it started retailing its products under the brand name, Saregama. Saregama Carvaan [ edit ] Carvaan [ edit ] Carvaan is a portable music player with a pre-loaded collection of 5000 evergreen songs. It is an easy to use device and features in-built stereo speakers. It supports other features like USB, FM, and aux in. Since its inception, Saregama has launched multiple variants of Carvaan in different languages like Hindi , Punjabi , Tamil , Bengali and Marathi .  In 2018, Saregama Carvaan Premium was launched with additional features. There are 52 additional stations (as compared to the base model) and app support is provided for iOS and Android to create playlist and controlling the music system.  In the year 2019, Saregama launched Carvaan 2.O. In addition to the collection of 5000 songs, Wi-Fi connectivity is available which provides access to over 300 audio stations and over 20,000 songs.  The content pushed as podcasts includes devotionals, childre's rhymes, talk shows, travel, food, and health. Carvaan Gold and Carvaan Gold 2.O are the premium versions of Saregama Carvaan which have all the old features of Carvaan along with Wi-Fi connectivity, additional audio stations, Champagne Gold and Rose Gold colours, and a Harman/Kardon sound system.  The other variants include Carvaan GO, Carvaan Mini and Carvaan Karaoke.  Carvaan can be purchased online through Amazon in India, USA, Canada, UK and UAE.  Carvaan GO [ edit ] Carvaan GO is a portable digital audio player with in-built speakers and a pre-loaded collection of 3000 retro Hindi songs by yesteryea's singing legends. The songs are divided into various categories such as Artistes, Specials and Playlists. The personal device has a rechargeable battery with approximately seven hours of playtime. The additional features include Bluetooth, aux cable, micro SD, and FM / AM options.  Carvaan Go Gold is available in Champagne Gold and Rose Gold color variants with Harman/Kardon sound. Carvaan Mini [ edit ] Carvaan Mini is a portable music player with multiple variants of Bhakti , Rabindrasangeet , and Gurbani . Other variants have a collection of 351 songs dedicated to Hindi legends, Marathi legends, Bengali legends, Kannada legends, Malayalam legends, Tamil legends, Telugu legends, and Carvaan Mini M. S. Subbulakshmi , consisting of 351 songs. Saregama recently launched Carvaan Mini Shrimad Bhagavad Gita , pre-loaded with 18 Adhyays, 700 verses of the Bhagavad Gita and 101 Krishna Bhajans.  Carvaan Mini Art of Living with knowledge task by Gurudev Sri Sri Ravi Shankar. [ clarification needed ] Carvaan Mini Kids, a dedicated variant for children, comes pre-loaded with over 80 English and Hindi rhymes, over 300 stories, over 15 learning topics, and over 30 mantras and devotional songs. Apart from pre-loaded content, it works as a Bluetooth speaker and offers USB and aux in compatibility. A special edition – Carvaan Mini Kids – Chhota Bheem has also been launched. Carvaan Karaoke [ edit ] Carvaan Karaoke launched in the year 2020.  It is the top end version of Carvaan with all its features plus 1000 Hindi karaoke tracks.  It comes pre-loaded with 5000 evergreen Hindi songs, 1000 karaoke tracks, over 300 daily updated podcast stations, FM/AM, Bluetooth, USB and aux in. Carvaan Karaoke has an inbuilt screen to display the karaoke screen, which slides upwards upon pressing the karaoke button. The karaoke lyrics can be displayed on a TV or projector by connecting it with an HDMI cable. It comes along with two wireless microphones. Karaoke tracks are classified under Actors, Artistes, Eras, Moods and Top 50 for easy and quick selection. It comes in the classic Metallic Red color. Awards [ edit ] Yoodlee Films [ edit ] Main article: Yoodlee Films Yoodlee Films is the film division of Saregama India. Founded in 2017, it is headquartered in Mumbai and has made 17 films across genres and languages, for both theatrical release and for video streaming platforms like Netflix , Disney+ Hotstar and Zee 5 . The film Hamid by Aijaz Khan was bestowed with two National Awards in the 66th National Awards for Best Film in Urdu and Best Child Artist for Talha Arshad Reshi. [ citation needed ]  Hamid also won the Muhammad Al-Ameen Award, a diploma of honour for the best film on peace at the 37th Fajr International Film Festival . [ citation needed ]  At the 67th National Film Awards, actor Naga Vishal won the National Award for'Best Child Artis' for his role in the film. [ citation needed ]  Additionally, Sushama Deshpande received a special mention for her acting in the movie Ajji , at the Indian Film Festival of Los Angeles . [ citation needed ]  Ali Haji also won the Best Child Actor Award for the movie Noblemen at the New York Indian Film Festival in 2018. [ citation needed ]  Film Discography [ edit ] Hindi [ edit ] P Physical distribution only Tamil [ edit ] Malayalam [ edit ] Television content [ edit ] Saregama produces content for TV channels in Tamil, Hindi, Telugu, Kannada, Malayalam, Marathi and Bengali. The company has created many serials and shows.

Indian filmmaker, actor (born 1978) Lijo Jose Pellissery (born 18 September 1978) is an Indian filmmaker and actor who works in Malayalam cinema . His best works include Amen (2013), Angamaly Diaries (2017),  Ee.Ma.Yau. (2018), Jallikattu (2019), Churuli (2021), and Nanpakal Nerathu Mayakkam (2023).   Pellissery is a recipient of the Best Director Award at the 48th Kerala State Film Awards for Ee.Ma.Yau. , Best Director Award at the 50th Kerala State Film Awards for Jallikattu , Best Film Award at the 44th Kerala Film Critics Association Awards for Jallikattu and twice recipient of Silver Peacock-Best Director at the 49th International Film Festival of India and 50th International Film Festival of India for his films Ee.Ma.Yau. and Jallikattu respectively .  He also received the Silver Crow Pheasant Award at the International Film Festival of Kerala 2018.  Pellissery made his debut in 2010 with the crime film Nayakan and followed it up with the crime-drama City of God (2011) and the black comedy satire Amen (2013), the last mentioned, a commercial success at the Kerala box office. His fourth film, Double Barrel , an experimental film received only mixed reviews. His fifth film was again a crime-gangster film Angamaly Diaries (2017), starring almost 90 new actors, which preceded Ee.Ma.Yau. , released in 2018. His movie Jallikkattu premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival. In 2020, Jallikkattu was selected as Indi's official entry for Best International Feature Film at the 93rd Academy Awards . Early life [ edit ] Pellissery was born on 18 September 1978 in Chalakudy in Thrissur district of the south Indian state of Kerala to Lilly and Jose Pellissery , a known film and theatre actor and a winner of a state award for best stage actor.   His schooling was at Carmel Higher Secondary School, Chalakudy and, after graduating from the Union Christian College, Aluva , he earned a maste's degree in business administration from the Indian Institute of Plantation Management, Bangalore .    Career [ edit ] By the time Lijo Pellissery was born, Jose Pellissery who co-owned a theatre group by Sarathy Theatres ,  was active in Malayalam films and this gave the young Lijo an early grounding in films.  His career started as an assistant to Manoj Pillai, an ad filmmaker, and Pellissery soon started making short films of his own. One of his films, 3 , was one of three films shortlisted for the best film award at the PIX Short Film Festival 2007.  He debuted as a feature film director in 2010 with Nayakan , which narrated the story of a Kathakali artist who joined the underworld to take revenge on those who killed his family. Though the film was critically acclaimed, it failed at the box office.     His next venture, City of God , one of the early New Generation films of Malayalam cinema  and a multi-starrer featuring Indrajith Sukumaran , Prithviraj Sukumaran , Parvathy , Swetha Menon and Rima Kallingal used hyperlink cinema as its narrative structure and was a critical success  but, again failed miserably at the box office; it was pulled from cinemas just days after its release.  It took another two years before he came up with his third movie, Amen , in 2013, which had Indrajith Sukumaran , Fahad Fasil , Swathi Reddy and Kalabhavan Mani in the lead roles and the movie succeeded at the box office while drawing good critical response.   After a gap of almost two years, Pellissery released his fourth film, Double Barrel , a comic thriller, with Prithviraj Sukumaran , Indrajith Sukumaran , Arya , Sunny Wayne and Asif Ali in the lead roles. However, the film did not succeed critically or commercially.  The next project, Angamaly Diaries , a black comedy cloaked in a gangster plot that revolves around the locale of Angamaly , was scripted by popular actor, Chemban Vinod Jose .  The film, made on a small budget of ₹30 million,  was received well at the box office and drew critical acclaim; Anurag Kashyap opined that Angamaly Diaries was his film of the year.   Ee.Ma.Yau. , his next film based on a satire written by P. F. Mathews  and with his regular composer, Prashant Pillai , scoring the music,  was premiered on 30 November 2017  but the release was delayed due to undisclosed reasons.  Before it was released on 4 May 2018, the film received the Kerala State Film Award for Best Director at the 48th Kerala State Film Awards .  The film also won him the Silver Peacock Award for the best director at the 49th International Film Festival of India (IFFI), 2018, which was held in Goa in November 2018  ( Chemban Vinod Jose , the protagonist of the film, also received the Silver Peacock Award for the best actor.  ) followed by the Sinema Zetu International Film Festival Award for Best Direction.  Filmmaking style [ edit ] Pellissery often uses non-linear style of narrative and long takes.  His early films had established actors in the lead roles but, Angamaly Diaries marked a change where almost the entire cast were newcomers with 86 new actors making their debut, and subsequently accomplishing a triumph in the form of a 11-minute uninterrupted long take in the climax.   Following the similar technique, Jallikattu has at least 6 long takes and have brought in over thousand extras for the climax sequence.  Filmography [ edit ] Awards [ edit ]

Welcome to Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit . 6,849,038 articles in English From toda's featured article DeLancey W. Gill (1859–1940) was an American drafter , landscape painter , and photographer. As a teenager, he moved in with an aunt in Washington, D.C. , after his mother and stepfather traveled west. He eventually found himself employed as an architectural draftsman for the Treasury . He created sketches and watercolor paintings of the city, with a particular focus on the still-undeveloped rural and poorer areas of the district. While working as an illustrator for the Smithsonian's Bureau of American Ethnology in the 1890s, he was appointed as the agenc's photographer without prior photographic training. He took portrait photographs that circulated widely of thousands of Native American delegates to Washington, including notable figures such as Chief Joseph and Geronimo . These photographs have come under modern criticism for his frequent use of props and clothing, sometimes outdated or inauthentic, given to the delegates. ( Full article... ) Recently featured: Oceanic whitetip shark RoboCop Tales of Monkey Island Archive By email More featured articles About Did you know ... Yevhen Klopotenko ... that Yevhen Klopotenko (pictured) fought a "war for borscht "? ... that a street in San Francisco was named after a man who used a false identity ? ... that Alfie Templeman described the style of his studio album Radiosoul as "incohesively cohesive"? ... that Rosemary Miller won her stat's skeet shooting championship one year after learning the sport, and then won a state shooting championship in all but two years for the rest of her life? ... that the Japanese boy band Nexz was created through the program Nizi Project season 2 ? ... that the Nazi collaborator Sebastiaan de Ranitz abandoned his office following Mad Tuesday , leaving his department in turmoil? ... that Gedling Town F.C.'s nickname "The Ferrymen" was inspired by the name of a pub located next to the tea's stadium? ... that Antonio Dini was the only survivor of a three-man crew after he crashed a plane into the sea, but had no recollection of the crash due to concussion? ... that after a pigeon sculpture in Wellington went missing, members of the public created a memorial for it? Archive Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Keir Starmer The New Popular Front wins the most seats in the National Assembly in the French legislative election but does not achieve a majority . The Labour Party wins the United Kingdom general election and Keir Starmer (pictured) becomes prime minister. Hurricane Beryl , the earliest-recorded Category 5 Atlantic hurricane in a calendar year, leaves at least 15 people dead in the Caribbean , Venezuela, and the United States. In the Netherlands, a new cabinet is sworn in, with Dick Schoof serving as the prime minister . Ongoing : Israel–Hamas war timeline Russian invasion of Ukraine timeline Sudanese civil war timeline Recent deaths : Jane McAlevey Rick Cluff Martti Wallén Audrey Flack Ismail Kadare Hugh Aldons Nominate an article On this day July 10 : Independence Day in the Bahamas ( 1973 ) Martin Luther King Jr. 1645 – English Civil War : The Parliamentarians destroyed the last Royalist field army at the Battle of Langport , ultimately giving Parliament control of the west of England. 1942 – An American naval aviator discovered a downed Japanese Mitsubishi A6M Zero on Akutan Island , Alaska, which was later rebuilt and flown to devise tactics against the aircraft during World War II. 1966 – Martin Luther King Jr. (pictured) led a rally in support of the Chicago Freedom Movement , one of the most ambitious civil-rights campaigns in the northern United States. 1999 – The United States defeated China in the final match of the third FIFA Wome's World Cup , setting records in both attendance and television ratings for wome's sports. 2006 – Typhoon Ewiniar made landfall in South Korea, causing damages across the country amounting to 2.06 trillion won (US$1.4 billion). Arthur Annesley, 1st Earl of Anglesey ( b. 1614) Eva Ekeblad ( b. 1724) Bobo Brazil ( b. 1924) Calogero Vizzini ( d. 1954) More anniversaries: July 9 July 10 July 11 Archive By email List of days of the year Toda's featured picture Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – The central hub for editors, with resources, links, tasks, and announcements. Village pump – Forum for discussions about Wikipedia itself, including policies and technical issues. Site news – Sources of news about Wikipedia and the broader Wikimedia movement. Teahouse – Ask basic questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Help desk – Ask questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Reference desk – Ask research questions about encyclopedic topics. Content portals – A unique way to navigate the encyclopedia. Wikipedi's sister projects Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation , a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects : Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning tools Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English . Many other Wikipedias are available ; some of the largest are listed below. 1,000,000+ articles العربية مصرى Deutsch Español فارسی ‎ Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 250,000+ articles Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gú Български Català Čeština Dansk Esperanto Euskara עברית Հայերեն 한국어 Magyar Norsk bokmål Română Simple English Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча 50,000+ articles Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bosanski کوردی Eesti Ελληνικά Frysk Gaeilge Galego Hrvatski ქართული Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių മലയാളം Македонски မြန်မာဘာသာ Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina ไทย తెలుగు اردو Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=1225315602 "

Welcome to Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit . 6,849,038 articles in English From toda's featured article DeLancey W. Gill (1859–1940) was an American drafter , landscape painter , and photographer. As a teenager, he moved in with an aunt in Washington, D.C. , after his mother and stepfather traveled west. He eventually found himself employed as an architectural draftsman for the Treasury . He created sketches and watercolor paintings of the city, with a particular focus on the still-undeveloped rural and poorer areas of the district. While working as an illustrator for the Smithsonian's Bureau of American Ethnology in the 1890s, he was appointed as the agenc's photographer without prior photographic training. He took portrait photographs that circulated widely of thousands of Native American delegates to Washington, including notable figures such as Chief Joseph and Geronimo . These photographs have come under modern criticism for his frequent use of props and clothing, sometimes outdated or inauthentic, given to the delegates. ( Full article... ) Recently featured: Oceanic whitetip shark RoboCop Tales of Monkey Island Archive By email More featured articles About Did you know ... Yevhen Klopotenko ... that Yevhen Klopotenko (pictured) fought a "war for borscht "? ... that a street in San Francisco was named after a man who used a false identity ? ... that Alfie Templeman described the style of his studio album Radiosoul as "incohesively cohesive"? ... that Rosemary Miller won her stat's skeet shooting championship one year after learning the sport, and then won a state shooting championship in all but two years for the rest of her life? ... that the Japanese boy band Nexz was created through the program Nizi Project season 2 ? ... that the Nazi collaborator Sebastiaan de Ranitz abandoned his office following Mad Tuesday , leaving his department in turmoil? ... that Gedling Town F.C.'s nickname "The Ferrymen" was inspired by the name of a pub located next to the tea's stadium? ... that Antonio Dini was the only survivor of a three-man crew after he crashed a plane into the sea, but had no recollection of the crash due to concussion? ... that after a pigeon sculpture in Wellington went missing, members of the public created a memorial for it? Archive Start a new article Nominate an article In the news Keir Starmer The New Popular Front wins the most seats in the National Assembly in the French legislative election but does not achieve a majority . The Labour Party wins the United Kingdom general election and Keir Starmer (pictured) becomes prime minister. Hurricane Beryl , the earliest-recorded Category 5 Atlantic hurricane in a calendar year, leaves at least 15 people dead in the Caribbean , Venezuela, and the United States. In the Netherlands, a new cabinet is sworn in, with Dick Schoof serving as the prime minister . Ongoing : Israel–Hamas war timeline Russian invasion of Ukraine timeline Sudanese civil war timeline Recent deaths : Jane McAlevey Rick Cluff Martti Wallén Audrey Flack Ismail Kadare Hugh Aldons Nominate an article On this day July 10 : Independence Day in the Bahamas ( 1973 ) Martin Luther King Jr. 1645 – English Civil War : The Parliamentarians destroyed the last Royalist field army at the Battle of Langport , ultimately giving Parliament control of the west of England. 1942 – An American naval aviator discovered a downed Japanese Mitsubishi A6M Zero on Akutan Island , Alaska, which was later rebuilt and flown to devise tactics against the aircraft during World War II. 1966 – Martin Luther King Jr. (pictured) led a rally in support of the Chicago Freedom Movement , one of the most ambitious civil-rights campaigns in the northern United States. 1999 – The United States defeated China in the final match of the third FIFA Wome's World Cup , setting records in both attendance and television ratings for wome's sports. 2006 – Typhoon Ewiniar made landfall in South Korea, causing damages across the country amounting to 2.06 trillion won (US$1.4 billion). Arthur Annesley, 1st Earl of Anglesey ( b. 1614) Eva Ekeblad ( b. 1724) Bobo Brazil ( b. 1924) Calogero Vizzini ( d. 1954) More anniversaries: July 9 July 10 July 11 Archive By email List of days of the year Toda's featured picture Other areas of Wikipedia Community portal – The central hub for editors, with resources, links, tasks, and announcements. Village pump – Forum for discussions about Wikipedia itself, including policies and technical issues. Site news – Sources of news about Wikipedia and the broader Wikimedia movement. Teahouse – Ask basic questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Help desk – Ask questions about using or editing Wikipedia. Reference desk – Ask research questions about encyclopedic topics. Content portals – A unique way to navigate the encyclopedia. Wikipedi's sister projects Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation , a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects : Commons Free media repository MediaWiki Wiki software development Meta-Wiki Wikimedia project coordination Wikibooks Free textbooks and manuals Wikidata Free knowledge base Wikinews Free-content news Wikiquote Collection of quotations Wikisource Free-content library Wikispecies Directory of species Wikiversity Free learning tools Wikivoyage Free travel guide Wiktionary Dictionary and thesaurus Wikipedia languages This Wikipedia is written in English . Many other Wikipedias are available ; some of the largest are listed below. 1,000,000+ articles العربية مصرى Deutsch Español فارسی ‎ Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 250,000+ articles Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gú Български Català Čeština Dansk Esperanto Euskara עברית Հայերեն 한국어 Magyar Norsk bokmål Română Simple English Srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Türkçe Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча 50,000+ articles Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bosanski کوردی Eesti Ελληνικά Frysk Gaeilge Galego Hrvatski ქართული Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių മലയാളം Македонски မြန်မာဘာသာ Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina ไทย తెలుగు اردو Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Main_Page&oldid=1225315602 "

